Computing Nonvacuous Generalization Bounds for Deep (Stochastic) Neural
Networks with Many More Parameters than Training Data
Gintare Karolina Dziugaite
Department of Engineering
University of Cambridge
Daniel M. Roy
Department of Statistical Sciences
University of Toronto
Abstract
One of the deﬁning properties of deep learn-
ing is that models are chosen to have many
more parameters than available training data.
In light of this capacity for overﬁtting, it is
remarkable that simple algorithms like SGD re-
liably return solutions with low test error. One
roadblock to explaining these phenomena in
terms of implicit regularization, structural prop-
erties of the solution, and/or easiness of the
data is that many learning bounds are quan-
titatively vacuous when applied to networks
learned by SGD in this “deep learning” regime.
Logically, in order to explain generalization,
we need nonvacuous bounds. We return to an
idea by Langford and Caruana (2001), who
used PAC-Bayes bounds to compute nonvac-
uous numerical bounds on generalization error
for stochastic two-layer two-hidden-unit neural
networks via a sensitivity analysis. By optimiz-
ing the PAC-Bayes bound directly, we are able
to extend their approach and obtain nonvacu-
ous generalization bounds for deep stochastic
neural network classiﬁers with millions of pa-
rameters trained on only tens of thousands of
examples. We connect our ﬁndings to recent
and old work on ﬂat minima and MDL-based
explanations of generalization.
1 INTRODUCTION
By optimizing a PAC-Bayes bound, we show that it is
possible to compute nonvacuous numerical bounds on the
generalization error of deep stochastic neural networks
with millions of parameters, despite the training data sets
being one or more orders of magnitude smaller than the
number of parameters. To our knowledge, these are the
ﬁrst explicit and nonvacuous numerical bounds computed
for trained neural networks in the modern deep learning
regime where the number of network parameters eclipses
the number of training examples.
The bounds we compute are data dependent, incorporating
millions of components optimized numerically to identify
a large region in weight space with low average empirical
error around the solution obtained by stochastic gradient
descent (SGD). The data dependence is essential: indeed,
the VC dimension of neural networks is typically bounded
below by the number of parameters, and so one needs as
many training data as parameters before (uniform) PAC
bounds are nonvacuous, i.e., before the generalization
error falls below 1. To put this in concrete terms, on
MNIST, having even 72 hidden units in a fully connected
ﬁrst layer yields vacuous PAC bounds.
Evidently, we are operating far from the worst case: ob-
served generalization cannot be explained in terms the
regularizing effect of the size of the neural network alone.
This is an old observation, and one that attracted con-
siderable theoretical attention two decades ago: Bartlett
[Bar97; Bar98] showed that, in large (sigmoidal) neural
networks, when the learned weights are small in magni-
tude, the fat-shattering dimension is more important than
the VC dimension for characterizing generalization. In
particular, Bartlett established classiﬁcation error bounds
in terms of the empirical margin and the fat-shattering
dimension, and then gave fat-shattering bounds for neu-
ral networks in terms of the magnitudes of the weights
and the depth of the network alone. Improved norm-
based bounds were obtained using Rademacher and Gaus-
sian complexity by Bartlett and Mendelson [BM02] and
Koltchinskii and Panchenko [KP02].
These norm-based bounds are the foundation of our cur-
rent understanding of neural network generalization. It
is widely accepted that these bounds explain observed
generalization, at least “qualitatively” and/or when the
weights are explicitly regularized. Indeed, recent work
by Neyshabur, Tomioka, and Srebro [NTS14] puts forth
arXiv:1703.11008v2  [cs.LG]  19 Oct 2017
the idea that SGD performs implicit norm-based regular-
ization. Somewhat surprisingly, when we investigated
state-of-the-art Rademacher bounds for ReLU networks,
the bounds were vacuous when applied to solutions ob-
tained by SGD on real networks/datasets. We discuss the
details of this analysis in Appendix D. While most theo-
reticians would assume these bounds were numerically
loose to some extent, they might be surprised to learn that
the bounds do not logically establish generalization on
their own. It is worth highlighting that this observation
does not necessarily rule out the existence of nonvacuous
bounds under the same or similar hypotheses. This is an
important avenue to investigate.
1.1 UNDERSTANDING SGD
Our investigation was instigated by recent empirical work
by Zhang, Bengio, Hardt, Recht, and Vinyals [Zha+17],
who show that stochastic gradient descent (SGD), applied
to deep networks with millions of parameters, is:
1. able to achieve≈ 0 training error on CIFAR10 and
IMAGENET and still generalize (i.e., test error re-
mains small, despite the potential for overﬁtting);
2. still able to achieve≈ 0 training error even after the
labels are randomized, and does so with only a small
factor of additional computational time.
Taken together, these two observations demonstrate that
these networks have a tremendous capacity to overﬁt and
yet SGD does not abuse this capacity as it optimizes the
surrogate loss, despite the lack of explicit regularization.
It is a major open problem to explain this phenomenon.
A natural approach would be to show that, under realis-
tic hypotheses, SGD performs implicit regularization or
tends to ﬁnd solutions that possess some particular struc-
tural property that we already know to be connected to
generalization. However, in order to complete the logical
connection, we need an associated error bound to be non-
vacuous in the regime of model size / data size where we
hope to explain the phenomenon.
This work establishes a potential candidate, building off
ideas by Langford [Lan02] and Langford and Caruana
[LC02]: On a binary class variant of MNIST, we ﬁnd that
SGD solutions are nearby to relatively large regions in
weight space with low average empirical error. We ﬁnd
this structure by optimizing a PAC-Bayes bound, starting
at the SGD solution, obtaining a nonvacuous generaliza-
tion bound for a stochastic neural network. Across a
variety of network architectures, our PAC-Bayes bounds
on the test error are in the range 16–22%. These are
far from nonvacuous but loose: Chernoff bounds on the
test error based on held-out data are consistently around
3%. Despite the gap, theoreticians aware of the numeri-
cal performance of generalization bounds will likely be
surprised that it is possible at all to obtain nonvacuous
numerical bounds for models with such large capacity
trained on so few training examples. While we cannot
entirely explain the magnitude of generalization, we can
demonstrate nontrivial generalization.
Our approach was inspired by a line of work in physics
by Baldassi, Ingrosso, Lucibello, Saglietti, and Zecchina
[Bal+15] and the same authors with Borgs and Chayes
[Bal+16]. Based on theoretical results for discrete opti-
mization linking computational efﬁciency to the existence
of nonisolated solutions, the authors propose a number of
new algorithms for learning discrete neural networks by
explicitly driving a local search towards nonisolated solu-
tions. On the basis of Bayesian ideas, they posit that these
solutions have good generalization properties. In a recent
work with Chaudhari, Choromanska, Soatto, and LeCun
[Cha+17], they introduce local-entropy loss and Entropy-
SGD, extending these algorithmic ideas to modern deep
learning architectures with continuous parametrizations,
and obtaining impressive empirical results.
In the continuous setting, nonisolated solutions corre-
spond to “ﬂat minima”. The existence and regularizing
effects of ﬂat minima in the empirical error surface was
recognized early on by researchers, going back at work
by Hinton and Camp [HC93] and Hochreiter and Schmid-
huber [HS97]. Hochreiter and Schmidhuber discuss sharp
versus ﬂat minima using the language of minimum de-
scription length (MDL; [Ris83; Gr¨u07]). In short, describ-
ing weights in sharp minima requires high precision in
order to not incur nontrivial excess error, whereas ﬂat min-
imum can be described with lower precision. A similar
coding argument appears in [HC93].
Hochreiter and Schmidhuber propose an algorithm to ﬁnd
ﬂat minima by minimizing the training error while max-
imizing the log volume of a connected region of the pa-
rameter space that yields similar classiﬁers with similarly
good training error. There are very close connections—
at both the level of analysis and algorithms—with the
work of Chaudhari et al. [Cha+17] and close connections
with the approach we take to compute nonvacuous error
bounds by exploiting the local error surface. (We discuss
more related work in Section 6.)
Despite the promising underpinnings, the generalization
theorems given by [Cha+17] have admittedly unrealistic
assumptions, and fall short of connecting local-entropy
minimization to observed generalization.
The goal of this work is to identify structure in the so-
lutions obtained by SGD that provably implies small
generalization error. Computationally, it is much easier
to demonstrate that a randomized classiﬁer will general-
ize, and so our results actually pertain to the generaliza-
tion error of a stochastic neural network, i.e., one whose
weights/biases are drawn at random from some distribu-
tion on every forward evaluation of the network. Under
bounded loss, Fubini’s theorem implies that we also ob-
tain a bound on the expected error of a neural network
whose weights have been randomly perturbed. It would
be interesting to achieve tighter control on the distribution
of error or on the error of the mean neural network.
Returning to the goal of explaining SGD and general-
ization in deep learning more generally, one could study
whether the type of structure we exploit to obtain bounds
necessarily arises from performing SGD under natural
conditions. (We suspect one condition may be that the
Bayes error rate is close to zero.) More ambitiously, per-
haps the existence of the same structure can explain the
success of SGD in practice.
1.2 APPROACH
Our working hypothesis is that SGD ﬁnds good solutions
only if they are surrounded by a relatively large volume
of solutions that are nearly as good. This hypothesis sug-
gests that PAC-Bayes bounds may be fruitful: if SGD
ﬁnds a solution contained in a large volume of equally
good solutions, then the expected error rate of a classiﬁer
drawn at random from this volume should match that of
the SGD solution. The PAC-Bayes theorem [McA99]
bounds the expected error rate of a classiﬁer chosen from
a distributionQ in terms of the Kullback–Liebler diver-
gence from some a priori ﬁxed distributionP , and so if
the volume of equally good solutions is large, and not
too far from the mass ofP , we will obtain a nonvacuous
bound.
Our approach will be to use optimization to ﬁnd a broad
distributionQ over neural network parameters that min-
imizes the PAC-Bayes bound, in effect mapping out the
volume of equally good solutions surrounding the SGD
solution. This idea is actually a modern take on an old
idea by Langford and Caruana [LC02], who apply PAC-
Bayes bounds to small two-layer stochastic neural net-
works (with only 2 hidden units) that were trained on
(relatively large, in comparison) data sets of several hun-
dred labeled examples.
The basic idea can be traced back even further to work
by Hinton and Camp [HC93], who propose an algorithm
for controlling overﬁtting in neural networks via the min-
imum description length principle. In particular, they
minimize the sum of the empirical squared error and the
KL divergence between a prior and posterior distribution
on the weights. Their algorithm is applied to networks
with 100’s of inputs and 4 hidden units, trained on sev-
eral hundred labeled examples. Hinton and Camp do
not compute numerical generalization bounds to verify
that MDL principles alone sufﬁce to explain the observed
generalization.
Our algorithm more directly extends the work by Lang-
ford and Caruana, who propose to construct a distribution
Q over neural networks by performing a sensitivity anal-
ysis on each parameter after training, searching for the
largest deviation that does not increase the training error
by more than, e.g., 1%. For Q, Langford and Caruana
choose a multivariate normal distribution over the net-
work parameters, centered at the parameters of the trained
neural network. The covariance matrix is diagonal, with
the variance of each parameter chosen to be the estimated
sensitivity, scaled by a global constant. (The global scale
is chosen so that the training error ofQ is within, e.g., 1%
of that of the original trained network.) Their priorP is
also a multivariate normal, but with zero mean and covari-
ance given by some scalar multiple of the identity matrix.
By employing a union bound, they allow themselves to
choose the scalar multiple in a data-dependent fashion to
optimize the PAC-Bayes bound.
The algorithm sketched by Langford and Caruana does
not scale to modern neural networks for several reasons,
but one dominates: in massively overparametrized net-
works, individual parameters often have negligible effect
on the training classiﬁcation error, and so it is not possible
to estimate the relative sensitivity of large populations of
neurons by studying the sensitivity of neurons in isolation.
Instead, we use stochastic gradient descent to directly
optimize the PAC-Bayes bound on the error rate of a
stochastic neural network. At each step, we update the
network weights and their variances by taking a step along
an unbiased estimate of the gradient of (an upper bound
on) the PAC-Bayes bound. In effect, the objective func-
tion is the sum of i) the empirical surrogate loss averaged
over a random perturbation of the SGD solution, and ii) a
generalization error bound that acts like a regularizer.
Having demonstrated that this simple approach can con-
struct a witness to generalization, it is worthwhile asking
whether these ideas can be extended to the setting of local-
entropic loss [Cha+17]. If we view the distribution that
deﬁnes the local-entropic loss as deﬁning a stochastic neu-
ral network, can we use PAC-Bayes bounds to establish
nonvacuous bounds on its generalization error?
2 PRELIMINARIES
Much of our setup is identical to that of [LC02]: We are
working in the batch supervised learning setting. Data
points are elementsx∈X⊆ Rk with binary class labels
y∈{− 1, 1}. LetSm denote a training set of sizem,
Sm ={(xi,yi)}i=1,...,m, where (xi,yi)∈ (X×Y ).
LetM denote the set of all probability measures on the
data space Rk×{−1, 1}. We will assume that the training
examples are i.i.d. samples from someµ∈M .
A parametric family of classiﬁers is a functionH : Rd×
Rk→{− 1, 1}, wherehw := H(w,·) : Rk→{− 1, 1}
is the classiﬁer indexed by the parameter w∈ Rd. The
hypotheses space induced by H isH = {hw : w ∈
Rd}. A randomized classiﬁer is a distribution Q on Rd.
Informally, we will speak of distributions onH when we
mean distributions on the underlying parametrization.
We are interested in the 0–1 lossℓ : R×{−1, 1}→{ 0, 1}
ℓ(ˆy,y ) = I(sign(ˆy) =y).
We will also make use of the logistic loss ˘ℓ : R×
{−1, 1}→ R+
˘ℓ(ˆy,y ) = 1
log(2) log
(
1 + exp(−ˆyy)
)
,
which will serve as a convex surrogate (i.e., upper bound)
to the 0–1 loss.
We deﬁne the following notions of error:
• ˆe(h,Sm) = 1
m
m∑
i=1
ℓ(h(xi),yi) empirical classiﬁca-
tion error of hypothesish for sampleSm;
• ˘e(h,Sm) = 1
m
m∑
i=1
˘ℓ(h(xi),yi) empirical (surro-
gate) error of a hypothesis h on the training data
setSm. We will use this for training purposes when
we need our empirical loss to be differentiable;
• eµ(h) = E
Sm∼µm
[ˆe(h,Sm)] expected error for hy-
pothesis h under the data distribution µ (we will
often drop the subscriptµ and just writee(h));
• ˆe(Q,Sm) = E
w∼Q
[ˆe(hw,Sm)] expected empirical
error under the randomized classiﬁerQ onH;
• e(Q) = E
w∼Q
[eµ(hw)] expected error forQ onH.
2.1 KL DIVERGENCE
LetQ,P be probability measures deﬁned on a common
measurable spaceH, such thatQ is absolutely continuous
with respect to P , and write dQ
dP :H→ R+∪{∞} for
some Radon–Nikodym derivative of Q with respect to
P . Then the Kullback–Liebler divergence (or relative
entropy) ofP fromQ is deﬁned to be
KL(Q||P ) :=
∫
log dQ
dP dQ.
We will mostly be concerned with KL divergences where
Q andP are probability measures on Euclidean space,Rd,
absolutely continuous with respect to Lebesgue measure.
Letq andp denote the respective densities. In this case,
the deﬁnition of the KL divergence simpliﬁes to
KL(Q||P ) =
∫
logq(x)
p(x)q(x)dx.
Of particular interest to us is the KL divergence be-
tween multivariate normal distributions in Rd. LetNq =
N (µq, Σq) be a multivariate normal with mean µq and
covariance matrix Σq, letNp =N (µp, Σp), and assume
Σq and Σp are positive deﬁnite. Then KL(Nq||Np) is
1
2
(
tr
(
Σ−1
p Σq
)
−k + (µp−µq)⊤ Σ−1
p (µp−µq)
+ ln
(det Σp
det Σq
))
.
(1)
Forp,q∈ [0, 1], we will abuse notation and deﬁne
KL(q||p) := KL(B(q)||B(p))
=q logq
p + (1−q) log 1−q
1−p,
whereB(p) denotes the Bernoulli distribution on{0, 1}
with meanp.
2.2 INVERTING KL BOUNDS
In the following sections, we will encounter bounds on a
quantityp∗∈ [0, 1] of the form
KL(q||p∗)≤c
for someq∈ [0, 1] andc≥ 0. Thus, we are interested in
KL−1(q|c) := sup{p∈ [0, 1] : KL( q||p)≤c}.
We are not aware of a simple formula for KL−1(q|c),
although numerical approximations are readily obtained
via Newton’s method (Appendix A). For the purpose of
gradient-based optimization, we can use the well-known
inequality, 2(q−p)2 ≤ KL(q||p), to obtain a simple
upper bound
KL−1(q|c)≤q +
√
c/2. (2)
This bound is quantitatively loose near q≈ 0, because
then KL−1(q|c)≈c forc≪ 1, versus the upper bound
of Θ(√c). On the other hand, when c is large enough
thatq +√c
2 > 1, the derivative of KL−1(q|c) is zero,
whereas the upper bound provides a useful derivative.
2.3 BOUNDS
We will employ three probabilistic bounds to control gen-
eralization error: the union bound, a sample convergence
bound derived from the Chernoff bound, and the PAC-
Bayes bound due to McAllester [McA99]. We state the
union bound for completeness.
Theorem 2.1 (union). LetE1,E 2,... be events. Then
P(⋃
nEn)≤∑
n P(En).
Recall thatB(p) denotes the Bernoulli distribution on
{0, 1} with mean p ∈ [0, 1]. The following bound is
derived from the KL formulation of the Chernoff bound:
Theorem 2.2 (sample convergence [LC02]). For every
p,δ ∈ (0, 1) andn∈ N, with probability at least 1−δ
overx∼B (p)n, KL(n−1∑n
i=1xi||p)≤ log 2
δ
n .
Finally, we present a variant of McAllester’s PAC-Bayes
bound due to Langford and Seeger [LS01]. (See also
[Lan02].)
Theorem 2.3 (PAC-Bayes [McA99; LS01]). For every
δ > 0, m∈ N, distribution µ on Rk×{− 1, 1}, and
distributionP onH, with probability at least 1−δ over
Sm∼µm, for all distributionsQ onH,
KL(ˆe(Q,Sm)||e(Q))≤ KL(Q||P ) + logm
δ
m− 1 .
The PAC-Bayes bound leads to the following learning
algorithm [McA99]:
1. Fix a probability δ >0 and a distributionP onH.
2. Collect an i.i.d. dataset Sm of sizem.
3. Compute the optimal distributionQ onH that mini-
mizes the error bound
KL−1
(
ˆe(Q,Sm)
⏐⏐⏐⏐
KL(Q||P ) + logm
δ
m− 1
)
. (3)
4. Return the randomized classiﬁer given by Q.
In all but the simplest scenarios, making predictions ac-
cording to the optimalQ is intractable. However, we can
attempt to approximate it.
3 PAC-BA YES BOUND OPTIMIZA TION
LetH be a parametric family of classiﬁers and writehw
for H(w,·). We will interpret hw as a neural network
with (weight/bias) parametersw∈ Rd, although the de-
velopment below is more general.
Fixδ∈ (0, 1) and a distributionP on Rd, and letSm∼
µm bem i.i.d. training examples. We aim to minimize
the PAC-Bayes bound (Eq. (3)) with respect toQ.
For w∈ Rd and s∈ Rd
+, letNw,s =N (w, diag(s))
denote the multivariate normal distribution with meanw
and diagonal covariance diag(s). As our ﬁrst simpliﬁca-
tions, we replace the PAC-Bayes with the upper bound
described by Eq. (2), replace the empirical loss with its
convex surrogate, and restrict Q to the family of mul-
tivariate normal distributions with diagonal covariance
structure, yielding the optimization problem
min
w∈Rd,s∈Rd
+
˘e(Nw,s,Sm) +
√
KL(Nw,s||P ) + logm
δ
2(m− 1) .
3.1 THE PRIOR
In order to obtain a KL divergence in closed form, we
chooseP to be multivariate normal. Symmetry consider-
ations would suggest that we chooseP =N (0,λI ) for
someλ> 0, however there is no single good choice ofλ.
(We will also see that there are good reasons not to choose
a zero mean, and so we will letw0 denote the mean to be
chosen a priori.)
In order to deal with the problem of choosingλ, we will
follow Langford and Caruana [LC02] and use a union-
bound argument to choose λ optimally from a discrete
set, at the cost of a slight expansion to our generalization
bound. In particular, we will takeλ =c exp{−j/b} for
somej∈ N and ﬁxed b,c≥ 0. (Hence, b determines a
level of precision andc is an upper bound.) If the PAC-
Bayes bound for each j∈ N is designed to hold with
probability at least 1− 6
π2j2 , then, by the union bound
(Theorem 2.1), it will hold uniformly for allj∈ N with
probability at least 1−δ, as desired.During optimization,
we will want to avoid discrete optimization, and so we
will treatλ as if it were a continuous variable. (We will
then discretizeλ when we evaluate the PAC-Bayes bound
after the fact.) Solving for j, we havej = b log c
λ, and
so we will replacej with this term during optimization.
Taking into account the choice ofP and the continuous
approximation to the union bound, we have the following
minimization problem:
min
w∈Rd,s∈Rd
+,λ∈(0,c)
˘e(Nw,s,Sm) +
√
1
2BRE(w,s,λ ;δ)
(4)
whereBRE(w,s,λ ;δ) is
KL(Nw,s||N (w0,λI ))+2 log(b log c
λ)+log π2m
6δ
m− 1 , (5)
and, using Eq. (1), the KL term simpliﬁes to
1
2
( 1
λ∥s∥1−d + 1
λ∥w−w0∥2
2 +d logλ− 1d· logs
)
.
We ﬁxδ = 0.025,b = 100, andc = 0.1.
3.2 STOCHASTIC GRADIENT DESCENT
We cannot optimize Eq. (4) directly because we cannot
compute ˘e(Nw,s,Sm) or its gradients efﬁciently. We can,
however, compute the gradient of the unbiased estimate
˘e(hw+ξ⊙√s,Sm), whereξ∼N 0,Id. We will use an i.i.d.
copy ofξ at each iteration. We did not experiment using
mini-batches during bound optimization.
3.3 FINAL PAC-BA YES BOUND
While we treatλ as a continuous parameter during opti-
mization, the union bound requires thatλ be of the form
λ =c exp{−j/b}, for somej∈ N. We therefore roundλ
up or down, choosing that which delivers the best bound,
as computed below.
According to the PAC-Bayes and union bound, with prob-
ability 1−δ, uniformly over allw∈ Rd,s∈ Rd
+, andλ
of the formc exp{−j/b}, forj∈ N, the error rate of the
randomized classiﬁerQ =Nw,s is bounded by
KL−1(ˆe(Q,Sm)|BRE(w,s,λ ;δ)).
We cannot compute this bound exactly because comput-
ing ˆe(Q,Sm) is intractable. However, we can obtain
unbiased estimates and apply the sample convergence
bound (Theorem 2.2). In particular, givenn i.i.d. samples
w1,...,w n fromQ, we produce the Monte Carlo approx-
imation ˆQn =∑n
i=1δwi, for which ˆe( ˆQn,Sm) is exactly
computable, and obtain the bound
ˆe(Q,Sm)≤ ˆen,δ′(Q,Sm)
:= KL−1(ˆe( ˆQn,Sm)|n−1 log 2/δ′),
which holds with probability 1−δ′. By another applica-
tion of the union bound,
e(Q)≤ KL−1(ˆen,δ′(Q,Sm)|BRE(w,s,λ ;δ)), (6)
with probability 1−δ−δ′. We use this bound in our
reported results.
4 EXPERIMENTS
Starting from neural networks whose weights have been
trained by SGD (with momentum) to achieve near-perfect
accuracy on a binary class variant of MNIST, we then op-
timize a PAC-Bayes bound on the error rate of stochastic
neural network whose weights are random perturbations
of the weights learned by SGD. We consider several dif-
ferent network architectures, varying both the depth and
the width of the network.
4.1 DA TASET
We use the MNIST handwritten digits data set [LCB10]
as provided in Tensorﬂow [TF], where the dataset is split
into the training set (55000 images) and test set (10000
images). (We do not use the validation set.) Each MNIST
image is black and white and 28-pixels square, resulting
in a network input dimension ofk = 784. MNIST is usu-
ally treated as a multiclass classiﬁcation problem. In order
to use standard PAC-Bayes bounds, we produce a binary
classiﬁcation problem by mapping numbers{0,..., 4} to
label 1 and{5,..., 9} to label−1. In some experiments,
we train on random labels, i.e., binary labels drawn inde-
pendently and uniformly at random.
4.2 INITIAL NETWORK TRAINING BY SGD
All experiments are performed on multilayer perceptrons,
i.e., feed-forward neural networks with 2 or more lay-
ers, each layer fully connected to the previous and next
layer. We choose a standard initialization scheme for
the weights and biases: Weights are initialized randomly
from a normal distribution (with mean zero and standard
deviationσ = 0.04) that is truncated to [−2σ, 2σ]. Biases
are initialized to a constant value of 0.1 for the ﬁrst layer
and 0 for the remaining layers. We let w0 denote this
random initialization of the weights (and biases).
We use REctiﬁed Linear Unit (RELU) activations at every
hidden node. The last layer is linear. In order to train
the weights, we minimize the logistic loss by SGD with
momentum (learning rate 0.01; momentum 0.9). SGD is
run in mini-batches of size 100. These settings are similar
to those in [Zha+17].
On our binary class variant of MNIST, we train several
neural network architectures of varying depth and width
(see Table 1). In each case, we train for a total of 20
epochs. We also train a small network (with one 600-unit
hidden layer) on random labels, in order to demonstrate
the large capacity of the network. Obtaining≈0 training
error requires 120 epochs. See the ﬁrst two rows of Table 1
for the train/test error rates.
4.3 PAC-BA YES BOUND OPTIMIZA TION
Starting from weightsw learned by SGD, we construct
a stochastic neural network with a multivariate normal
distributionQ =Nw,s over its weights with meanw and
covariance diag(s). We initializes to|w| and|w|/10 for
true- and random-label experiments, respectively.
We optimize the PAC-Bayes bound (Eq. (4)) starting from
an initial choice of e−6 for the prior varianceλ and the
prior mean ﬁxed at the random initializationw0. (See Ap-
pendix B for a discussion of this subtle but important inno-
Experiment T-600 T-1200 T- 3002 T-6002 T-12002 T-6003 R-600
Train error 0.001 0.002 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.000 0.007
Test error 0.018 0.018 0.015 0.016 0.015 0.013 0.508
SNN train error 0.028 0.027 0.027 0.028 0.029 0.027 0.112
SNN test error 0.034 0.035 0.034 0.033 0.035 0.032 0.503
PAC-Bayes bound 0.161 0.179 0.170 0.186 0.223 0.201 1.352
KL divergence 5144 5977 5791 6534 8558 7861 201131
# parameters 471k 943k 326k 832k 2384k 1193k 472k
VC dimension 26m 56m 26m 66m 187m 121m 26m
Table 1: Results for experiments on binary class variant of MNIST. SGD is either trained on (T) true labels or
(R) random labels. The network architecture is expressed asNL, indicatingL hidden layers withN nodes each.
Errors are classiﬁcation error. The reported VC dimension is the best known upper bound (in millions) for ReLU
networks. The SNN error rates are tight upper bounds (see text for details). The PAC-Bayes bounds upper bound
the test error with probability 0.965.
vation.) We transform the constrained optimization over
w∈ Rd,s∈ Rd
+, andλ∈ (0,c ), into an unconstrained
optimization overw, 1
2 log(s), and 1
2 log(λ), respectively.
We optimize the objective by gradient descent with the
RMSprop optimizer (with decay 0.9, as is typical). We
use the unbiased estimate of the gradient of the empirical
surrogate error of the randomized classiﬁer Q =Nw,s.
We set the learning rate to 0.001 for the ﬁrst 150000
iterations, and then lower it to 0.0001 for the ﬁnal 50000
iterations. For the random-label experiment, we optimize
the bound with a smaller 0.0001 learning rate for 500000
iterations. In both cases, the learning rate is tuned so that
the objective decreases smoothly during learning.
Algorithm 1 is pseudo code for optimizing the PAC-Bayes
bound. The code implements vanilla SGD, although it
can be easily modiﬁed to use an optimizer like RMSprop.
4.4 REPORTED V ALUES
Reported error rates correspond to classiﬁcation error.
Train and test error rates are empirical averages for net-
works learned by SGD. In light of 10000 test data points
and the observed error rates, upper bounds via Theo-
rem 2.2 are only 0.005 higher.
Reported train and test error rates for the stochastic neural
networks (abbreviated SNN) are upper bounds computed
by an application of Theorem 2.2 as described in Sec-
tion 3.3 withδ′ = 0.01 andn = 150000. These numbers
produce estimates within 0.001–0.002.
The PAC-Bayes bound is computed as described in Sec-
tion 3.3. Each bound holds with probability 0.965 over the
choice of the training set and the draws from the learned
SNN Q. For the random-label experiment, we report√
1
2BRE(w,s,λ ;δ) from Eq. (5), since the PAC-Bayes
bound is vacuous when this quantity is greater than 1.
Our VC-dimension bounds for ReLU networks are com-
puted from a formula communicated to us by Bartlett
[Bar17]. These bounds are in O(LW logW ), whereL is
the number of layers andW is the total number of tunable
parameters across layers.
5 RESULTS
See Table 1. All SGD trained networks achieve perfect
or near-perfect accuracy on the training data. On true
labels, the SNN mean training error increases slightly
as the weight distribution broadens to minimize the KL
divergence. The SGD solution is close to mean of the
SNN as measured with respect to the SNN covariance.
(See Appendix C for a discussion.) For the random-label
experiment, the SNN mean training error rises above 10%.
Ideally, it might have risen to nearly 50%, while driving
down the KL term to near zero.
The empirical test error of the SGD classiﬁers does not
change much across the different architectures, despite
the potential for overﬁtting. This phenomenon is well
known, though still remarkable. For the random-label
experiment, the empirical test classiﬁcation error of 0.508
represents lack of generalization, as expected. The same
two patterns hold for the SNN test error too, with slightly
higher error rates.
Remarkably, the PAC-Bayes bounds do not grow much de-
spite the networks becoming several times larger, and all
true label experiments have classiﬁcation error bounded
by 0.23. (This observation is consistent with [NTS14].)
Since larger networks possess many more symmetries,
the true PAC-Bayes bounds for our learned stochastic
neural network classiﬁer might be substantially smaller.
(See Appendix B for a discussion.) While these bounds
Algorithm 1 PAC-Bayes bound optimization by SGD
Input:
w0∈ Rd ⊿ Network parameters (random init.)
w∈ Rd ⊿ Network parameters (SGD solution)
Sm ⊿ Training examples
δ∈ (0, 1) ⊿ Conﬁdence parameter
b∈ N,c∈ (0, 1) ⊿ Precision and bound forλ
τ∈ (0, 1),T ⊿ Learning rate; # of iterations
Output: Optimalw,s,λ ⊿ Weights, variances
1: procedure PAC-BAYES-SGD
2: ς← abs(w) ⊿ wheres(ς) = e2ς
3: ϱ←− 3 ⊿ whereλ(ϱ) = e2ϱ
4: B(w,s,λ,w ′) = ˘e(hw′,Sm)+
√
1
2BRE(w,s,λ )
5: fort← 1,T do ⊿ Run SGD for T iterations.
6: Sampleξ∼N (0,Id)
7: w′(w,ς ) =w +ξ⊙
√
s(ς)
⊿ Gradient step
8:


w
ς
ϱ

 -=τ


∇wB(w,s (ς),λ (ϱ),w′(w,ς ))
∇ςB(w,s (ς),λ (ϱ),w′(w,ς ))
∇ϱB(w,s (ς),λ (ϱ),w′(w,ς ))


9: returnw,s (ς),λ (ϱ)
are several times larger than the test error estimated on
held-out data (approximately, 0.03), they demonstrate
nontrivial generalization. The PAC-Bayes bound for the
random-label experiment is vacuous.
The VC-dimension upper bounds indicate that data in-
dependent bounds will be vacuous by several orders of
magnitude. Because the number of parameters exceeds
the available training data, lower bounds imply that gener-
alization cannot be explained in a data independent way.
6 RELA TED WORK
As we mention in the introduction, our approach scales the
ideas in [HC93] and [LC02] to the modern deep learning
regime where the networks have millions of parameters,
but are trained on one or two orders of magnitude fewer
training examples. The objective we optimize is an upper
bound on the PAC-Bayes bound, which we know from the
discussion in Section 2.2 will be very loose when the em-
pirical classiﬁcation error is approximately zero. Indeed,
in that case, the PAC-Bayes bound is approximately
ˆe(Nw,s,Sm) + KL(Nw,s||P ) + logm
δ
(m− 1) . (7)
The objective optimized by Hinton and Camp is of the
same essential form as this one, except for the choice of
squared error and different prior and posterior distribu-
tions. We explored using Eq. (7) as our objective with a
surrogate loss, but it did not produce different results.
In the introduction we discuss the close connection of our
work to several recent papers [Bal+15; Bal+16; Cha+17]
that study “ﬂat” or nonisolated minima on the account of
their generalization and/or algorithmic properties.
Based on theoretical results for k-SAT that efﬁcient algo-
rithms ﬁnd nonisolated solutions, Baldassi et al. [Bal+16]
model efﬁcient neural network learning algorithms as
minimizers of a replicated version of the empirical loss
surface, which emphasizes nonisolated minima and deem-
phasizes isolated minima. They then propose several
algorithms for learning discrete neural networks using
these ideas.
In follow-up work with Chaudhari, Choromanska, Soatto,
and LeCun [Cha+17], they translate these ideas into the
setting of continuously parametrized neural networks.
They introduce an algorithm, called Entropy-SGD, which
seeks out large regions of dense local minima: it max-
imizes the depth and ﬂatness of the energy landscape.
Their objective integrates both the energy of nearby pa-
rameters and the weighted distance to the parameters. In
particular, rather than directly minimizing an error surface
w↦→L(hw,Sm), they propose the following minimiza-
tion problem over the so-called local-entropic loss:
min
w∈Rd
log E
W∼Nw,1/γ
[C(γ) exp{−L(hW,Sm)}], (8)
where γ > 0 is a parameter and C(γ) a constant. In
comparison, our algorithm can be interpreted as an opti-
mization of the form
min
w∈Rp,s∈Rp
+
E
W∼Nw,s
[L(hW,Sm)] + R(w,s ) (9)
whereR serves as a regularizer that accounts for the gener-
alization error by, roughly speaking, trying to expand the
axis-aligned ellipsoid{x∈ Rd : (w−x)T diag(s)−1(w−
x) = 1} and draw it closer to some pointw0 near the ori-
gin. Comparing Eqs. (8) and (9) highlights similarities
and differences. The local-entropic loss is sensitive to the
volume of the regions containing good solutions. While
the ﬁrst term in our objective function looks similar, it
does not, on its own, account for the volume of regions.
This role is played by the second term, which prefers
large regions (but also ones near the initialization w0).
In our formulation, the ﬁrst term is the empirical error
of a stochastic neural network, which is precisely the
term whose generalization error we are trying to bound.
Entropy-SGD was not designed for the purpose of ﬁnding
good stochastic neural networks, although it seems pos-
sible that having small local-entropic loss would lead to
generalization for neural networks whose parameters are
drawn from the local Gibbs distribution. Another differ-
ence is that, in our formulation, the diagonal covariance of
the multivariate normal perturbation is learned adaptively,
and driven by the goal of minimizing error. The shape
of the normal perturbation is not learned, although the
region whose volume is being measured is determined by
the error surface, and it seems likely that this volume will
be larger than that spanned by a multivariate Gaussian
chosen to lie entirely in a region with good loss.
Chaudhari et al. [Cha+17] give an informal characteri-
zation of the generalization properties of local-entropic
loss in Bayesian terms by comparing the marginal likeli-
hood of two Bayesian priors centered at a solution with
small and large local-entropic loss. Informally, a Bayesian
prior centered on an isolated solution will lead to small
marginal likelihood in contrast to one centered in a wide
valley. They give a formal result relying on the uniform
stability of SGD [HRS15] to show under some strong
(and admittedly unrealistic) conditions that Entropy-SGD
generalizes better than SGD. The key property is that the
local-entropic loss surface is smoother than the original
error surface.
Other authors have found evidence of the importance of
“ﬂat” minima: Recent work by Keskar, Mudigere, No-
cedal, Smelyanskiy, and Tang [Kes+17] ﬁnds that large-
batch methods tend to converge to sharp / isolated minima
and have worse generalization performance compared to
mini-batch algorithms, which tend to converge to ﬂat min-
ima and have good generalization performance. The bulk
of their paper is devoted to the problem of restoring good
generalization behavior to batch algorithms.
Finally, our algorithm also bears resemblance to gradu-
ated optimization, an approach toward non-convex op-
timization attributed to Blake and Zisserman [BZ87]
whereby a sequence of increasingly ﬁne-grained versions
of an optimization problem are solved in succession. (See
[HLS16] and references therein.) In this context, Eq. (8)
is the result of a local smoothing operation acting on
the objective functionw↦→ ˘ℓ(hw,SM). In graduate op-
timization, the effect of the local smoothing operation
would be decreased over time, eventually disappearing.
In our formulation, the act of balancing the empirical loss
and generalization error serve to drive the evolution of
the local smoothing in an adaptive fashion. Moreover,
in the limit, the local smoothing does not vanish in our
algorithm, as the volume spanned by the perturbations
relates to the generalization error. Our results suggest that
SGD solutions live inside relatively large volumes, and
so perhaps SGD can be understood in terms of graduated
optimization.
7 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
We obtain nonvacuous generalization bounds for deep
neural networks with millions of parameters trained on
55000 MNIST examples. These bounds are obtained
by optimizing an objective derived from the PAC-Bayes
bound, starting from the solution produced by SGD. De-
spite the weights changing, the SGD solution remains
well within the 1% ellipsoidal quantile, i.e., the volume
spanned by the stochastic neural network contains the
original SGD solution. (When labels are randomized,
however, optimizing the PAC-Bayes bound causes the
solution to shift considerably.)
Our experiments look only at fully connected feed for-
ward networks trained on a binary class variant of MNIST.
It would be interesting to see if the results extend to mul-
ticlass classiﬁcation, to other data sets, and to other types
of architectures, especially convolutional ones.
Our PAC-Bayes bound can be tightened in several ways.
Highly dependent weights constrain the size of the axis-
aligned ellipsoid representing the stochastic neural net-
work. We can potentially recognize small populations of
highly dependent weights, and optimize their covariance
parameters, rather than enforcing independence in the
posterior.
One might also consider replacing the multivariate normal
posterior with a distribution that is more tuned to the loss
surface. One promising avenue is to follow the lines of
Chaudhari et al. [Cha+17] and consider (local) Gibbs
distributions. If the solutions obtained by minimizing the
local-entropic loss are ﬂatter than those obtained by SGD,
than we may be able to demonstrate quantitatively tighter
bounds.
Finally, there is the hard work of understanding the gen-
eralization properties of SGD. In light of our work, it
may be useful to start by asking whether SGD ﬁnds solu-
tions in ﬂat minima. Such solutions could then be lifted
to stochastic neural networks with good generalization
properties. Going from stochastic networks back to deter-
ministic ones may require additional structure.
Acknowledgments This research was carried out while
the authors were visiting the Simons Institute for the The-
ory of Computing at UC Berkeley. The authors would
like to thank Peter Bartlett, Shai Ben-David, Dylan Foster,
Matus Telgarsky, and Ruth Urner for helpful discussions.
GKD is supported by an EPSRC studentship. DMR is
supported by an NSERC Discovery Grant, Connaught
Award, and U.S. Air Force Ofﬁce of Scientiﬁc Research
grant #FA9550-15-1-0074.
REFERENCES
[Bal+15] C. Baldassi, A. Ingrosso, C. Lucibello, L. Saglietti,
and R. Zecchina. “Subdominant Dense Clusters
Allow for Simple Learning and High Computa-
tional Performance in Neural Networks with Dis-
crete Synapses”. Phys. Rev. Lett. 115 (12 Sept.
2015), p. 128101.
[Bal+16] C. Baldassi, C. Borgs, J. T. Chayes, A. Ingrosso, C.
Lucibello, L. Saglietti, and R. Zecchina. “Unrea-
sonable effectiveness of learning neural networks:
From accessible states and robust ensembles to ba-
sic algorithmic schemes”. Proceedings of the Na-
tional Academy of Sciences113.48 (2016), E7655–
E7662. eprint: http://www.pnas.org/content/113/
48/E7655.full.pdf.
[Bar17] P. L. Bartlett. “The impact of the nonlinearity on
the VC-dimension of a deep network”. Preprint.
2017.
[Bar97] P. L. Bartlett. “For valid generalization the size
of the weights is more important than the size of
the network”. In: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems. 1997, pp. 134–140.
[Bar98] P. L. Bartlett. “The sample complexity of pattern
classiﬁcation with neural networks: the size of
the weights is more important than the size of
the network”. IEEE Transactions on Information
Theory 44.2 (1998), pp. 525–536.
[BM02] P. L. Bartlett and S. Mendelson. “Rademacher and
Gaussian complexities: Risk bounds and structural
results”. Journal of Machine Learning Research
3.Nov (2002), pp. 463–482.
[BZ87] A. Blake and A. Zisserman. Visual Reconstruction.
Cambridge, MA, USA: MIT Press, 1987.
[Cha+17] P. Chaudhari, A. Choromanska, S. Soatto, Y . Le-
Cun, C. Baldassi, C. Borgs, J. Chayes, L. Sagun,
and R. Zecchina. “Entropy-SGD: Biasing Gradi-
ent Descent Into Wide Valleys”. In:International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR).
2017. arXiv: 1611.01838v4 [cs.LG].
[Gr¨u07] P. D. Gr¨unwald. The minimum description length
principle. MIT press, 2007.
[HC93] G. E. Hinton and D. van Camp. “Keeping the Neu-
ral Networks Simple by Minimizing the Descrip-
tion Length of the Weights”. In: Proceedings of
the Sixth Annual Conference on Computational
Learning Theory. COLT ’93. Santa Cruz, Califor-
nia, USA: ACM, 1993, pp. 5–13.
[HLS16] E. Hazan, K. Y . Levy, and S. Shalev-Shwartz.
“On Graduated Optimization for Stochastic Non-
Convex Problems”. In: Proceedings of the 33rd
International Conference on Machine Learning
(ICML). 2016, pp. 1833–1841.
[HRS15] M. Hardt, B. Recht, and Y . Singer. “Train faster,
generalize better: Stability of stochastic gradient
descent”. CoRR abs/1509.01240 (2015).
[HS97] S. Hochreiter and J. Schmidhuber. “Flat Minima”.
Neural Comput. 9.1 (Jan. 1997), pp. 1–42.
[Kes+17] N. S. Keskar, D. Mudigere, J. Nocedal, M.
Smelyanskiy, and P. T. P. Tang. “On Large-Batch
Training for Deep Learning: Generalization Gap
and Sharp Minima”. In: International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR). 2017. arXiv:
1609.04836v2 [cs.LG].
[KP02] V . Koltchinskii and D. Panchenko. “Empirical mar-
gin distributions and bounding the generalization
error of combined classiﬁers”. Ann. Statist. 30.1
(2002), pp. 1–50.
[Lan02] J. Langford. “Quantitatively tight sample complex-
ity bounds”. Carnegie Mellon University, 2002.
[LC02] J. Langford and R. Caruana. “(Not) Bounding the
True Error”. In: Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems 14. Ed. by T. G. Dietterich,
S. Becker, and Z. Ghahramani. MIT Press, 2002,
pp. 809–816.
[LCB10] Y . LeCun, C. Cortes, and C. J. C. Burges.
MNIST handwritten digit database .
http://yann.lecun.com/exdb/mnist/. 2010.
[LS01] J. Langford and M. Seeger. Bounds for Averaging
Classiﬁers. Tech. rep. CMU-CS-01-102. Carnegie
Mellon University, 2001.
[McA99] D. A. McAllester. “PAC-Bayesian Model Averag-
ing”. In: Proceedings of the Twelfth Annual Con-
ference on Computational Learning Theory. COLT
’99. Santa Cruz, California, USA: ACM, 1999,
pp. 164–170.
[NSS15] B. Neyshabur, R. Salakhutdinov, and N. Sre-
bro. “Path-SGD: Path-Normalized Optimization
in Deep Neural Networks”. In: Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems. 2015. arXiv:
1506.02617v1 [cs.LG].
[NTS14] B. Neyshabur, R. Tomioka, and N. Srebro. In
Search of the Real Inductive Bias: On the Role of
Implicit Regularization in Deep Learning. Work-
shop track poster at ICLR 2015. 2014. arXiv: 1412.
6614v4 [cs.LG].
[NTS15] B. Neyshabur, R. Tomioka, and N. Srebro. “Norm-
based capacity control in neural networks”. In:
Proceedings of the Eigth Annual Conference on
Learning Theory. COLT 2016. 2015, pp. 1376–
1401. arXiv: 1503.00036v2 [cs.LG].
[Ris83] J. Rissanen. “A Universal Prior for Integers and Es-
timation by Minimum Description Length”. Ann.
Statist. 11.2 (June 1983), pp. 416–431.
[TF] M. Abadi, A. Agarwal, P. Barham, E. Brevdo,
Z. Chen, C. Citro, G. S. Corrado, A. Davis, J.
Dean, M. Devin, S. Ghemawat, I. Goodfellow, A.
Harp, G. Irving, M. Isard, Y . Jia, R. Jozefowicz,
L. Kaiser, M. Kudlur, J. Levenberg, D. Man´e, R.
Monga, S. Moore, D. Murray, C. Olah, M. Schus-
ter, J. Shlens, B. Steiner, I. Sutskever, K. Talwar, P.
Tucker, V . Vanhoucke, V . Vasudevan, F. Vi´egas, O.
Vinyals, P. Warden, M. Wattenberg, M. Wicke, Y .
Yu, and X. Zheng. TensorFlow: Large-Scale Ma-
chine Learning on Heterogeneous Systems. Soft-
ware available from tensorﬂow.org. 2015.
[Zha+17] C. Zhang, S. Bengio, M. Hardt, B. Recht, and O.
Vinyals. “Understanding deep learning requires
rethinking generalization”. In: International Con-
ference on Representation Learning (ICLR). 2017.
arXiv: 1611.03530v2 [cs.LG].
A APPROXIMA TING KL−1(Q|C)
There is no simple formula for KL−1(q|c), but we can
approximate it via root-ﬁnding techniques. For all q∈
(0, 1) andc≥ 0, deﬁne hq,c(p) = KL(q||p)−c. Then
h′
q,c(p) = 1−q
1−p− q
p. Given a sufﬁciently good initial
estimatep0 of a root ofhq,c(·), we can obtain improved
estimates of a root via Newton’s method:
pn+1 = N(pn;q,c ) where N(p;q,c ) =p− hq,c(c)
h′q,c(p).
This suggests the following approximation to KL−1(q|c):
1. Let ˜b =q +√c
2.
2. If ˜b≥ 1, then return 1.
3. Otherwise, return Nk(˜b), for some integerk> 0.
Our reported results use ﬁve steps of Newton’s method.
B NETWORK SYMMETRIES
In an ideal world, we would account for all the network
symmetries when computing the KL divergence in the
PAC-Bayes bound. However, it does not seem to be com-
putationally feasible to account for the symmetries, as we
discuss below. Given this, it makes sense to try to break
the symmetries somehow. Indeed, one consequence of
randomly initializing a neural network’s weights is that
some symmetries are broken. If we do not expect SGD
to reverse (many of) these symmetries, then the initial
weight conﬁguration, w0, will be a better mean for the
PAC-Bayes prior P than the origin. In fact, breaking
symmetries in this way lead to much better bounds than
setting the means to zero.
B.1 BOUNDS FROM MIXTURES
Fix a neural network architecture H : Rd× Rk →
{−1, 1} and write hw forH(w,·). It has long been ap-
preciated that distinct parametrizations w,w′∈ Rd can
lead to the same functions hw = hw′, and so the set
H ={hw : w∈ Rd} of classiﬁers deﬁned by a neural
network architecture is a quotient space of Rd.
For the purposes of understanding the generalization er-
ror of neural networks, we would ideally work directly
withH. Let P,Q be a distributions on Rd, i.e., stochas-
tic neural networks. Then P and Q induce distribu-
tions onH, which we will denote by ¯P and ¯Q, respec-
tively. For the purposes of the PAC-Bayes bound, it is
the KL divergence KL( ¯Q|| ¯P ) that upper bounds the per-
formance of the stochastic neural networkQ. In general,
KL( ¯Q|| ¯P )≤ KL(Q||P ), but it is difﬁcult in practice
to approximate the former because the quotient space is
extremely complex.
One potential way to approachH is to account for sym-
metries in the parameterization. A network symmetry is
a mapσ : Rd→ Rd such that, for allw∈ Rd, we have
hw = hσ(w). As an example of such a symmetry, in a
fully connected network with identical activation func-
tions at every unit, the function computed by the network
is invariant to permuting the nodes with a hidden layer.
Let S be any ﬁnite set of symmetries possessed by the
architecture. For every distributionQ on Rd and network
symmetry σ, we may deﬁne Qσ = Q◦σ−1 to be the
distribution over networks obtained by ﬁrst sampling net-
work parameters fromQ and then applying the mapσ to
obtain a network that computes the same function.
Deﬁne QS = 1
|S|
∑
σ∈SQσ. Informally, Q andQS are
identical when viewed as distributions on functions, yet
QS spreads its mass evenly over equivalent parametriza-
tions. In particular, for any data setS, we have ˆe(Q,S ) =
ˆe(QS,S ). We callQS a symmetrized version ofQ. The
following lemma states that symmetrized versions always
have smaller KL divergence with respect to distributions
that are invariant to symmetrization: Before stating the
lemma, recall that the differential entropy of an abso-
lutely continuous distributionQ on Rd with densityq is∫
q(x) logq(x)dx∈ R∪{−∞,∞}.
Lemma B.1. Let S be a ﬁnite set of network symmetries,
letP be an absolutely continuous distribution such that
P = Pσ for all σ ∈ S, and deﬁne QS as above for
some arbitrary absolutely continuous distributionQ on
Rd with ﬁnite differential entropy. Then KL(QS||P ) =
KL(Q||P )− KL(Q||QS)≤ KL(Q||P ).
The above lemma can be generalized to distributions over
(potentially inﬁnite) sets of network symmetries.
It follows from this lemma that one can do no worse
by accounting for symmetries using mixtures, provided
that one is comparing to a distributionP that is invariant
to those symmetries. In light of the PAC-Bayes theo-
rem, this means that a generalization bound based upon a
KL divergence that does not account for symmetries can
likely be improved. However, for a ﬁnite set S of symme-
tries, it is easy to show that the improvement is bounded
by log|S|, which suggests that, in order to obtain appre-
ciable improvements in a numerical bound, one would
need to account for an exponential number of symmetries.
Unfortunately, exploiting this many symmetries seems
intractable. It is hard to obtain useful lower bounds to
KL(Q||QS), while upper bounds from Jensen’s inequal-
ity lead to negative (hence vacuous) lower bounds on
KL(QS||P ).
In this work, we therefore take a different approach to
dealing with symmetries. Neural networks are randomly
initialized in order to break symmetries. Combined with
the idea that the learned parameters will reﬂect these
broken symmetries, we choose our priorP to be located
at the random initialization, rather than at zero.
C COMPARING WEIGHTS BEFORE
AND AFTER PAC-BA YES OPTIMIZA-
TION
In the course of optimizing the PAC-Bayes bound, we
allow the meanw to deviate from the SGD solutionwSGD
that serves as the starting point. This is necessary to
obtain bounds as tight as those that we computed. Do the
weights change much during optimization of the bound?
How would we measure this change?
To answer these questions, we calculated the p-value of
the SGD solution under the distribution of the stochastic
neural network.
LetQSNN denote the distribution obtained by optimizing
the PAC-Bayes bound, writewSNN and ΣSNN for its mean
and covariance, and let∥w∥ΣSNN = wT Σ−1
SNNw denote
the induced norm. Using 10000 samples, we estimated
P
w∼QSNN
(
∥w−wSNN∥ΣSNN <∥wSGD−wSNN∥ΣSNN
)
.
The estimate was 0 for all true label experiments, i.e.,
wSGD is less extreme of a perturbation of wSNN than a
typical perturbation. For the random-label experiments,
wSNN andwSGD differ signiﬁcantly, which is consistent
with the bound being optimized in the face of random
labels.
D EV ALUA TING RADEMACHER ER-
ROR BOUNDS
Fix a class F of measurable functions from RD to R
and letRm(F) denote the Rademacher complexity ofF
associated with m i.i.d. samples. For h∈F , we will
obtain binary classiﬁcations (and measure error and em-
pirical error) by computing the sign of its output, i.e., by
thresholding. The following error bound is a straightfor-
ward adaptation of [BM02, Thm. 7], which is itself an
adaptation of [KP02, Thm. 2].
Theorem D.1. For everyL> 0, with probability at least
1−δ over the choice ofSm∼µm, for allh∈F ,
e(h)≤ ˆe(h,Sm,L ) + 2LRm(F) +
√
log( 2
δ )
2m , (10)
where
ˆe(h,Sm,L ) = 1
m
m∑
i=1
max(min(1−Lyih(xi), 1), 0).
In order to compute these bounds, we must compute
(bounds on) the Rademacher complexity of appropri-
ate function classes. To that end, we will use results
by Neyshabur, Tomioka, and Srebro [NTS15] for ReLU
networks (i.e., multilayer perceptrons with ReLU activa-
tions).
Letw be the weights of a ReLU network and let w(k)
i,j
denote the weight associated with the edge from neuroni
in layerk−1 to neuronj in layerk. Neyshabur, Tomioka,
and Srebro [NTS15] deﬁne theℓ1 path norm
φ1(w) =
∑
j
[
|w(2)
j,1|
∑
i
|w(1)
i,j|
]
, (11)
stated here in the special case of a 2-layer network with 1
output neuron. For any number of layers, the path norm
can be computed easily in a forward pass, requiring only
a matrix–vector product at each layer.
Neyshabur, Tomioka, and Srebro also provide the follow
Rademacher bound in terms of the path norm:
Theorem D.2 ([NTS15, Cor. 7]) . Given m datapoints
x1,...,x m ∈ RD, the Rademacher complexity of the
class of depth-d ReLU networks, whose ℓ1 path norms
are bounded byφ, is no greater than
2dφ
√
log(2D)
m max
i
∥xi∥∞. (12)
Letw(k)
j for the jth column of w(j), i.e., the vector of
weights for edges from layerk− 1 to neuronj in layerk.
Theℓ1 path norm is closely related to the norm
γ1,∞(w) =
d∏
i=1
max
j
w(k)
j

1.
If the upper bound φ appearing in the bound of Theo-
rem D.2 is instead taken to be a bound onγ1,∞(w), then
one essentially obtains the Gaussian complexity bounds
for neural networks established by Bartlett and Mendelson
[BM02] and Koltchinskii and Panchenko [KP02]. How-
ever, their bounds apply only to networks with bounded
activation functions, ruling out ReLU networks.
Regardless, the path-norm bound is tighter for ReLU net-
works. In order to establish the connection, let W(w)
denote the set of all weightsw′ obtained from redistribut-
ing the weightsw across layers, i.e., by multiplying the
weightsw(k−1) in a layer by a constantc> 0 and multi-
plying the weights in the subsequent layer w(k) byc−1.
Note that the function computed by a ReLU network is
invariant to this transformation. This is the key insight of
Neyshabur, Tomioka, and Srebro. Obviously,φ1(w) =
φ1(w′) for all w′∈W (w). Neyshabur, Tomioka, and
Srebro show thatφ1(w) = infw′∈W(w)γ1,∞(w′), and so
the path norm better captures the complexity of a ReLU
network.
In our experiments, we will compute the bound obtained
by combining Theorems D.1 and D.2.
Note that the constantL in Theorem D.1 must be chosen
independently of the data Sm. As in the original result
[KP02, Thm. 2], one can use a union bound to allow
oneself to chooseL based on the data in order to minimize
the bound. Even though the effect of this change is usually
(relatively) small, its magnitude depends on the particular
weight function employed in the union bound. Instead,
we will apply the bound with an optimizedL, yielding an
optimistic bound (formally, a lower bound on any upper
bound obtained from a union bound). We optimize L
over a grid of values, and handle the vacuous edge cases
analytically. Nevertheless, we will see even the resulting
(optimistic) bound is vacuous.
D.1 EXPERIMENT DETAILS
We use SGD to train a two-layer 600-hidden-unit ReLU
network on the same binary class variant of MNIST used
to evaluate our PAC-Bayes bounds. We set the global
learning rate to 0.005. As in our PAC-Bayes experi-
ments, we optimize the average logistic loss during train-
ing. The random initializations commonly used for ReLU
networks lead to initial path norms that produce vacuous
error bounds. In order to visualize the behavior of the
path-norm bound under SGD, we reduce the standard de-
viation of the truncated-normal initialization from 0.04 to
0.0001. As before, we use mini-batches of 100 training
examples, yielding 550 iterations per epoch.
For comparison, we also train the same network ar-
chitecture while explicitly regularizing the path norm.
(Neyshabur, Salakhutdinov, and Srebro [NSS15] propose
training neural networks via steepest descent with respect
to the path norm. We leave this comparison to future
work.)
D.2 RESULTS
When the network is trained by optimizing the logistic
cost function without regularization, the error bound be-
comes vacuous within a fraction of a single epoch. This
occurs before the training error dips appreciable below
chance. The bound’s behavior is due to the path norm di-
verging. While the level sets ˆe(h,S,·)−1 of the empirical
margin distribution are growing, they are not growing fast
enough to counteract the growth of the path norm. (See
the left column of Fig. 1.)
When the network is trained with explicit path-norm reg-
ularization, we obtain vacuous error bounds, unless we
apply excessive amounts of regularization. We report re-
sults when the regularization parameter is 0.01 and 0.05.
Both settings are clearly too large, as evidenced by the
training error converging to ~20% and ~30%, respec-
tively. A cursory study of overallℓ1 andℓ2 regularization
produced qualitatively similar results. Further study is
necessary.
0 1 2 3 4 5
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.00-1 Error
Unregularized
0 1 2 3 4 5
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Regularized (0.01)
Train error
Test error
Bound
0 1 2 3 4 5
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Regularized (0.05)
0 1 2 3 4 5
10 2
10 1
100
101
102
103
Path norm
0 1 2 3 4 5
10 2
10 1
100
101
102
103
0 1 2 3 4 5
10 3
10 2
10 1
100
101
102
103
0 1 2 3 4 5
Epoch
0.0
3.0
6.0
9.0
12.0
15.0Margin
0 1 2 3 4 5
Epoch
0.0
3.0
6.0
9.0
12.0
15.0
0 1 2 3 4 5
Epoch
0.0
3.0
6.0
9.0
12.0
15.0
Figure 1: Unregularized ( left column ) and path-norm regularized ( center and right columns with regularization
parameter speciﬁed in parenthesis) optimization of two-layer 600-hidden-unit ReLU network by SGD for 5 epochs. (We
ran 20 epochs and found no new patterns. Plots for longer experiment obscured the initial behavior.) (top row) Training
error, testing error, and error bounds versus (iterations measured in) epochs. Without regularization, the bounds are
immediately vacuous once the network performance deviates from chance, and this remains true under regularization
unless the explicit regularization is very strong. In this case, the bound is nonvacuous, but trivial in the sense that the
error rate of guessing is 50%. Note that training/testing error is also very large in this case. (center row) Log plot of
path norm versus epochs. Without regularization, the path norm diverges quickly. ( bottom row) Empirical margin
distributions versus epochs. The margin that attains a ﬁxed average loss is growing, but not rapidly enough to counteract
the rapidly increasing path norm.