On Characterizing the Capacity of Neural Networks using Algebraic Topology
William H. Guss 1 Ruslan Salakhutdinov 1
{wguss, rsalakhu}@cs.cmu.edu
Abstract
The learnability of different neural architectures
can be characterized directly by computable mea-
sures of data complexity. In this paper, we re-
frame the problem of architecture selection as
understanding how data determines the most ex-
pressive and generalizable architectures suited to
that data, beyond inductive bias. After suggesting
algebraic topology as a measure for data com-
plexity, we show that the power of a network to
express the topological complexity of a dataset in
its decision region is a strictly limiting factor in
its ability to generalize. We then provide the ﬁrst
empirical characterization of the topological ca-
pacity of neural networks. Our empirical analysis
shows that at every level of dataset complexity,
neural networks exhibit topological phase tran-
sitions. This observation allowed us to connect
existing theory to empirically driven conjectures
on the choice of architectures for fully-connected
neural networks.
1. Introduction
Deep learning has rapidly become one of the most perva-
sively applied techniques in machine learning. From com-
puter vision (Krizhevsky et al., 2012) and reinforcement
learning (Mnih et al., 2013) to natural language process-
ing (Wu et al., 2016) and speech recognition (Hinton et al.,
2012), the core principles of hierarchical representation and
optimization central to deep learning have revolutionized
the state of the art; see Goodfellow et al. (2016). In each do-
main, a major difﬁculty lies in selecting the architectures of
models that most optimally take advantage of structure in the
data. In computer vision, for example, a large body of work
((Simonyan & Zisserman, 2014), (Szegedy et al., 2014), (He
et al., 2015), etc.) focuses on improving the initial archi-
tectural choices of Krizhevsky et al. (2012) by developing
novel network topologies and optimization schemes speciﬁc
1Machine Learning Department, Carnegie Mellon University,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
to vision tasks. Despite the success of this approach, there
are still not general principles for choosing architectures in
arbitrary settings, and in order for deep learning to scale
efﬁciently to new problems and domains without expert ar-
chitecture designers, the problem of architecture selection
must be better understood.
Theoretically, substantial analysis has explored how vari-
ous properties of neural networks, (eg. the depth, width,
and connectivity) relate to their expressivity and generaliza-
tion capability ((Raghu et al., 2016), (Daniely et al., 2016),
(Guss, 2016)). However, the foregoing theory can only be
used to determine an architecture in practice if it is under-
stood how expressive a model need be in order to solve
a problem. On the other hand, neural architecture search
(NAS) views architecture selection as a compositional hy-
perparameter search ((Saxena & Verbeek, 2016), (Fernando
et al., 2017), (Zoph & Le, 2017)). As a result NAS ideally
yields expressive and powerful architectures, but it is of-
ten difﬁcult to interpret the resulting architectures beyond
justifying their use from their empirical optimality.
We propose a third alternative to the foregoing: data-ﬁrst
architecture selection. In practice, experts design architec-
tures with some inductive bias about the data, and more
generally, like any hyperparameter selection problem, the
most expressive neural architectures for learning on a par-
ticular dataset are solely determined by the nature of the
true data distribution. Therefore, architecture selection can
be rephrased as follows: given a learning problem (some
dataset), which architectures are suitably regularized and
expressive enough to learn and generalize on that problem?
A natural approach to this question is to develop some ob-
jective measure of data complexity, and then characterize
neural architectures by their ability to learn subject to that
complexity. Then given some new dataset, the problem
of architecture selection is distilled to computing the data
complexity and choosing the appropriate architecture.
For example, take the two datasetsD1 andD2 given in Fig-
ure 1(a,b) and Figure 1(c,d) respectively. The ﬁrst dataset,
D1, consists of positive examples sampled from two disks
and negative examples from their compliment. On the right,
datasetD2 consists of positive points sampled from two
disks and two rings with hollow centers. Under some ge-
arXiv:1802.04443v1  [cs.LG]  13 Feb 2018
On Characterizing the Capacity of Neural Networks using Algebraic Topology
ometric measure of complexityD2 appears more ’compli-
cated’ thanD1 because it contains more holes and clusters.
As one trains single layer neural networks of increasing
hidden dimension on both datasets, the minimum number of
hidden units required to achieve zero testing error is ordered
according to this geometric complexity. Visually in Figure
1, regardless of initialization no single hidden layer neural
network with≤ 12 units, denotedh≤12, can express the two
holes and clusters inD2. Whereas on the simplerD1, both
h12 andh26 can express the decision boundary perfectly.
Returning to architecture selection, one wonders if this char-
acterization can be extrapolated; that is, is it true that for
datasets with ’similar’ geometric complexity toD1, any ar-
chitecture with≥ 12 hidden learns perfectly, and likewise
for those datasets similar in complexity toD2, architectures
with≤ 12 hidden units can never learn to completion?
1.1. Our Contribution
In this paper, we formalize the above notion of geometric
complexity in the language of algebraic topology. We show
that questions of architecture selection can be answered by
understanding the ’topological capacity’ of different neural
networks. In particular, a geometric complexity measure,
called persistent homology, characterizes the capacity of
neural architectures in direct relation to their ability to gen-
eralize on data. Using persistent homology, we develop
a method which gives the ﬁrst empirical insight into the
learnability of different architectures as data complexity
increases. In addition, our method allows us to generate
conjectures which tighten known theoretical bounds on the
expressivity of neural networks. Finally, we show that topo-
logical characterizations of architectures areuseful in prac-
tice by presenting a new method, topological architecture
selection, and applying it to several OpenML datasets.
2. Background
2.1. General Topology
In order to more formally describe notions of geometric
complexity in datasets, we will turn to the language of topol-
ogy. Broadly speaking, topology is a branch of mathematics
that deals with characterizing shapes, spaces, and sets by
their connectivity. In the context of characterizing neural
networks, we will work towards deﬁning the topological
complexity of a dataset in terms of how that dataset is ’con-
nected’, and then group neural networks by their capacity
to produce decision regions of the same connectivity.
In topology, one understands the relationships between two
different spaces of points by the continuous maps between
them. Informally, we say that two topological spacesA and
B are equivalent (A∼=B) if there is a continuous function
f :A→B that has an inversef−1 that is also continuous.
Figure 1. The positive label outptus of single hidden layer neural
networks,h12 andh26, of 2 inputs with 12 and 26 hidden units
respectively after training on datasets D1 and D2 with positive
examples in red. Highlighted regions of the output constitute the
positive decision region.
Whenf exists, we say thatA andB are homeomorphic and
f is their homeomorphism; for a more detailed treatment of
general topology see Bredon (2013). In an informal way,
D1̸∼=D2 in Figure 1 since if there were a homeomorphism
f : D1 → D2 at least one of the clusters in D1 would
need to be split discontinuously in order to produce the four
different regions inD2.
The power of topology lies in its capacity to differentiate
sets (topological spaces) in a meaningful geometric way that
discards certain irrelevant properties such as rotation, trans-
lation, curvature, etc. For the purposes of deﬁning geomet-
ric complexity, non-topological properties1 like curvature
would further ﬁne-tune architecture selection–say ifD2 had
the same regions but with squigly (differentially complex)
boundaries, certain architectures might not converge–but
as we will show, grouping neural networks by ’topological
capacity’ provides a powerful minimality condition. That
is, we will show that if a certain architecture is incapable of
expressing a decision region that is equivalent in topology
to training data, then there is no hope of it ever generalizing
to the true data.
2.2. Algebraic Topology
Algebraic topology provides the tools necessary to not only
build the foregoing notion of topological equivalence into
a measure of geometric complexity, but also to compute
that measure on real data ((Betti, 1872), (Dey et al., 1998),
(Bredon, 2013)). At its core, algebraic topology takes topo-
logical spaces (shapes and sets with certain properties) and
assigns them algebraic objects such as groups, chains, and
other more exotic constructs. In doing so, two spaces can
be shown to be topologically equivalent (or distinct) if the
algebraic objects to which they are assigned are isomorphic
(or not). Thus algebraic topology will allow us to compare
the complexity of decision boundaries and datasets by the
objects to which they are assigned.
1A topological property or invariant is one that is preserved by
a homeomorphism. For example, the number of holes and regions
which are disjoint from one another are topological properties,
whereas curvature is not.
On Characterizing the Capacity of Neural Networks using Algebraic Topology
Although there are many ﬂavors of algebraic topology, a
powerful and computationally realizable tool is homology.
Deﬁnition 2.1 (Informal, (Bredon, 2013)). IfX is a topo-
logical space, thenHn(X) = Zβn is called thenth homol-
ogy group ofX if the power βn is the number of ’holes’
of dimensionn inX. Note that β0 is the number of sepa-
rate connected components. We call βn(X) thenth Betti
number of X. Finally, the homology 2 ofX is deﬁned as
H(X) ={Hn(X)}∞
n=0.
Immediately homology brings us closer to deﬁning the com-
plexity ofD1 andD2. If we assume thatD1 is not actually
a collection ofN datapoints, but really the union of 2 solid
balls, and likewise that D2 is the union of 2 solid balls
and 2 rings, then we can compute the homology directly.
In this case H0(D1) = Z2 since there are two connected
components3; H1(D1) = {0} since there are no circles
(one-dimensional holes); and clearly, Hn(D1) ={0} for
n≥ 2. Performing the same computation in the second
case, we get H0(D2) = Z4 and H1(D2) = Z2 as there
are 4 seperate clusters and 2 rings/holes. With respect to
any reasonable ordering on homology,D2 is more complex
thanD1. The measure yields non-trivial differentiation of
spaces in higher dimension. For example, the homology of
a hollow donut is{Z1, Z2, Z1, 0,... }.
Surprisingly, the homology of a space contains a great deal
of information about its topological complexity1. The fol-
lowing theorem suggests the absolute power of homology
to group topologically similar spaces, and therefore neural
networks with topologically similar decision regions.
Theorem 2.2 (Informal). Let X and Y be topological
spaces. IfX∼=Y thenH(X) =H(Y ).4
Intuitively, Theorem 2.2 states that number of ’holes’ (and
in the case ofH0(X), connected components) are topologi-
cally invariant, and can be used to show that two shapes (or
decision regions) are different.
2.3. Computational Methods for Homological
Complexity
In order to compute the homology of bothD1 andD2 we
needed to assume that they were actually the geometric
shapes from which they were sampled. Without such as-
sumptions, for any dataset D a H(D) = {ZN, 0,... }
where N is the number of data points. This is because,
at small enough scales each data point can be isolated as
2This deﬁnition of homology makes many assumptions onX
and the base ﬁeld of computation, but for introductory purposes,
this informality is edifying.
3Informally, a connected component is a set which is not con-
tained in another connected set except for itself.
4Equality ofH(X) andH(Y ) should be interpreted as isomor-
phism between each individualHi(X) andHi(Y ).
Figure 2. An illustration of computing persistent homology on a
collection of points ((Topaz et al., 2015))
its own connected component; that is, as sets each pair of
different positive pointsd1,d 2∈D are disjoint. To prop-
erly utilize homological complexity in better understanding
architecture selection, we need to be able to compute the
homology of the data directly and still capture meaningful
topological information.
Persistent homology, introduced in Zomorodian & Carlsson
(2005), avoids the trivialization of computation of dataset
homology by providing an algorithm to calculate the homol-
ogy of a ﬁltration of a space. Speciﬁcally, a ﬁltration is a
topological spaceX equipped with a sequence of subspaces
X0 ⊂ X1 ⊂···⊂ X. In Figure 2 one such particular
ﬁltration is given by growing balls of size ϵ centered at
each point, and then letting Xϵ be the resulting subspace
in the ﬁltration. Deﬁne βn(X) to be the nth Betti num-
ber of the homology H(Xϵ) ofXϵ. Then for example at
ϵ = 1.5, β0(Xϵ) = 19 and β1(Xϵ) = 0 as every ball is
disjoint. Atϵ = 5.0 some connected components merge and
β0(Xϵ) = 12 andβ1(Xϵ) = 0. Finally atϵ = 7, the union
of the balls forms a hole towards the center of the dataset
andβ1(Xϵ)> 0 withβ0(Xϵ) = 4.
All together the change in homology and therefore Betti
numbers forXϵ asϵ changes can be summarized succinctly
in the persistence barcode diagram given in Figure 2. Each
bar in the sectionβn(X) denotes a ’hole’ of dimensionn.
The left endpoint of the bar is the point at which homology
detects that particular component, and the right endpoint
is when that component becomes indistinguishable in the
ﬁltration. When calculating the persistent homology of
datasets we will frequently use these diagrams.
With the foregoing algorithms established, we are now
equipped with the tools to study the capacity of neural net-
works in the language of algebraic topology.
3. Homological Characterization of Neural
Architectures
In the forthcoming section, we will apply persistent homol-
ogy to empirically characterize the power of certain neural
On Characterizing the Capacity of Neural Networks using Algebraic Topology
architectures. To understand why homological complexity
is a powerful measure for differentiating architectures, we
present the following principle.
Suppose thatD is some dataset drawn from a joint distri-
butionF with continuous CDF on some topological space
X×{0, 1}. LetX + denote the support of the distribution of
points with positive labels, andX− denote that of the points
with negative labels. Then let HS(f) := H[f−1((0,∞))]
denote the support homology of some function f : X→
{0, 1}. EssentiallyHS(f) is homology of the set ofx such
thatf(x)> 0. For a binary classiﬁer,f,HS(f) is roughly a
characterization of how many ’holes’ are in the positive de-
cision region off. We will sometimes useβn(f) to denote
thenth Betti number of this support homology. Finally let
F ={f :X→{ 0, 1}} be some family of binary classiﬁers
onX.
Theorem 3.1 (Homological Generalization). IfX =X−⊔
X + and for allf∈F withHS(f)̸=H(X +), then for all
f∈F there existsA⊂X + sof misclassiﬁes everyx∈A.
Essentially, Theorem 3.1 says that if an architecture (a fam-
ily of models F) is incapable of producing a certain ho-
mological complexity, then for any model using that archi-
tecture there will always be a set A of true datapoints on
which the model will fail. Note that the above principle
holds regardless of howf∈F is attained, learned or other-
wise. The principle implies that no matter how well somef
learns to correctly classifyD there will always be counter
examples in the true data.
In the context of architecture selection, the foregoing mini-
mality condition signiﬁcantly reduces the size of the search
space by eliminating smaller architectures which cannot
even express the ’holes’ (persistent homology) of the data
H(D). This allows us to return to our original question
of ﬁnding suitably expressive and generalizable architec-
tures but in the very computable language of homological
complexity: Let FA the set of all neural networks with
’architecture’A, then
Given a datasetD, for which architecturesA does there
exist a neural networkf∈F A such thatHS(f) =H(D)?
We will resurface a contemporary theoretical view on this
question, and thereafter make the ﬁrst steps towards an
empirical characterization of the capacity of neural architec-
tures in the view of topology.
3.1. Theoretical Basis for Neural Homology
Theoretically, the homological complexity of neural network
can be framed in terms of the sum of the number of holes
expressible by certain architectures. In particular, Bianchini
et al. (2014) gives an analysis of how the maximum sum of
Figure 3. Scatter plots of 6 different synthetic datasets of varying
homological complexity.
Betti numbers grows asFA changes. The results show that
the width and activation of a fully connected architecture
effect its topological expressivity to varying polynomial and
exponential degrees.
What is unclear from this analysis is how these bounds
describe expressivity or learnability in terms of individual
Betti numbers. From a theoretical perspective Bianchini
et al. (2014) stipulated that a characterization of individual
homology groups require the solution of deeper unsolved
problems in algebraic topology. However, for topological
complexity to be effective in architecture selection, under-
standing each Betti number is essential in that it grants
direct inference of architectural properties from the persis-
tent homology of the data. Therefore we turn to an empirical
characterization.
3.2. Empirical Characterization
To understand how the homology of data determines ex-
pressive architectures we characterize the capacities of ar-
chitectures with an increasing number of layers and hidden
units to learn and express homology on datasets of varying
homological complexity.
Restricting5 our analysis to the case ofn = 2 inputs, we gen-
erate binary datasets of increasing homological complexity
by samplingN = 5000 points from mixtures of Unif(S1)
and Unif(B2), uniform random distributions on solid and
empty circles with known support homologies. The homolo-
gies chosen range contiguously from H(D) ={Z1, 0} to
H(D) ={Z30, Z30} and each sampled distribution is geo-
metrically balanced i.e. each topological feature occupies
the same order of magnitude. Additionally, margins were
induced between the classes to aid learning. Examples are
shown in Figure 3.
5Although we chose to study the low dimensional setting be-
cause it allows us to compute the persistent homology of the de-
cision region directly, the convergence analysis extends to any
number of dimensions.
On Characterizing the Capacity of Neural Networks using Algebraic Topology
Figure 4. Topological phase transitions in low dimensional neural networks as the homological complexity of the data increases. The
upper right corner of each plot is a dataset on which the neural networks of increasing ﬁrst layer hidden dimension are trained. Each plot
gives the minimum error for each architecture versus the number of minibatches seen.
To characterize the difﬁculty of learning homologically com-
plex data in terms of both depth and width, we consider
fully connected architectures with ReLu activation func-
tions (Nair & Hinton, 2010) of depth ℓ ={1,..., 6} and
widthhl =β0(D) when 1≤l≤ℓ andhl∈{ 1,..., 500}
whenl = 0. We will denote individual architectures by the
pair (ℓ,h 0). We vary the number of hidden units in the ﬁrst
layer, as they form a half-space basis for the decision region.
The weights of each architecture are initialized to samples
from a normal distributionN (0, 1
β0
) with variance respect-
ing the scale of each synthetic dataset. For each homology
we take several datasets sampled from the foregoing proce-
dure and optimize 100 initializations of each architecture
against the standard cross-entropy loss. To minimize the
objective we use the Adam optimizer (Kingma & Ba, 2014)
with a ﬁxed learning rate of 0.01 and an increasing batch
size schedule (Smith et al., 2017).
We compare each architectures average and best perfor-
mance by measuring misclassiﬁcation error over the course
of training and homological expressivity at the end of train-
ing. The latter quantity, given by
Ep
H(f,D) = min
{βp(f)
βp(D), 1
}
,
measures the capacity of a model to exhibit the true homol-
ogy of the data. We compute the homology of individual
decision regions by constructing a ﬁltration on Heaviside
step function of the difference of the outputs, yielding a per-
sistence diagram with the exact homological components of
the decision regions. The results are summarized in Figures
4-6
The resulting convergence analysis indicates that neural
networks exhibit a statistically signiﬁcant topological phase
transition during learning which depends directly on the
homological complexity of the data. For any dataset and
any random homeomorphism applied thereto, the best error
of architectures with ℓ layers and h hidden units (on the
ﬁrst layer) is strictly limited in magnitude and convergence
time byhphase. For example in Figure 4,ℓ = 3 layer neural
networks fail to converge forh < hphase = 4 on datasets
with homologyH(D5) = (Z2, Z1,... ).
More generally, homological complexity directly effects the
efﬁcacy of optimization in neural networks. As shown in
Figure 5, taking any increasing progression of homologies
against the average convergence time of a class of architec-
tures yields an approximately monotonic relationship; in
this case, convergence time athphase increases with increas-
ingβp(D), and convergence time ath>h phase decreases
with ﬁxedβp(D). A broader analysis for a varying number
of layers is given in the appendix.
Returning to the initial question of architecture selection,
the analysis of empirical estimation ofEp
H(f,D) provides
the ﬁrst complete probabilistic picture of the homological
expressivity of neural architectures. For architectures with
ℓ∈{ 1, 2, 3, 4} andh0∈{ 0,..., 30} Figure 6 displays the
estimated probability that (ℓ,h 0) expresses the homology
of the decision region after training. Speciﬁcally, Figure
6(top) indicates that, forℓ = 1 hidden layer neural networks,
maxβ0(f)) is clearly Ω(h0). Examining ℓ = 2, 3, 4 in
Figure 6(top), we conjecture6 that asℓ increases
max
f∈FA
β0(f)∈ Ω(hℓ
0)),
6We note thatβ0(f ) does not depend onβ1(D) in the experi-
ment for datasets withβ1(D)>β 0(D) were not generated.
On Characterizing the Capacity of Neural Networks using Algebraic Topology
Figure 5. A scatter plot of the number of iterations required for
single-layer architectures of varying hidden dimension to converge
to 5% misclassiﬁcation error. The colors of each point denote the
topological complexity of the data on which the networks were
trained. Note the emergence of monotonic bands. Multilayer plots
given in the appendix look similar.
by application of Theorem 3.1 to the expressivity estimates.
Therefore
hphase≥C
ℓ
√
β0(D). (3.1)
Likewise, in Figure 6(bottom), each horizontal matrix gives
the probability of expressingβ1(D)∈{ 1, 2} for each layer.
This result indicates that higher order homology is extremely
difﬁcult to learn in the single-layer case, and as ℓ→∞ ,
maxf∈fAβ1(f)→n = 2, the input dimension.
The importance of the foregoing empirical characterization
for architecture selection is two-fold. First, by analyzing the
effects of homological complexity on the optimization of dif-
ferent architectures, we were able to conjecture probabilistic
bounds on the learnable homological capacity of neural net-
works. Thus, predictions of minimal architectures using
those bounds are sufﬁcient enough to learn data homology
up to homeomorphism. Second, the analysis of individual
Betti numbers enables data-ﬁrst architecture selection using
persistent homology.
4. Topological Architecture Selection
We have thus far demonstrated the discriminatory power
of homological complexity in determining the expressivity
of architectures. However, for homological complexity to
have any practical use in architecture selection, it must
be computable on real data, and more generally real data
must have non-trivial homology. In the following section
we present a method for relating persistent homology of
any dataset to a minimally expressive architecture predicted
by the foregoing empirical characterization, and then we
experimentally validate our method on several datasets.
Topological architecture selection is comprised of three
steps: given a dataset, compute its persistent homology;
Figure 6. A table of estimated probabilities of different neural ar-
chitectures to express certain homological features of the data
after training. Top: the probabilities of express homologies with
increasingβ0 as a function of layers and neurons. Bottom: The
probabilities of expressingβ1 ∈ {1, 2} as a function of layers and
neurons.
determine an appropriate scale at which to accept topologi-
cal features as pertinent to the learning problem; and infer a
lower-bound onhphase from the topological features at or
above the decided scale.
The extraction of static homology from persistence homol-
ogy, while aesthetically valid (Carlsson et al., 2008), is
ill-posed in many cases. For the purposes of architecture
selection, however, exact reconstruction of the original ho-
mology is not necessary. Given a persistence diagram,Dp
containing the birthsbi and deathsdi of features inHp(D),
letϵ be given and consider allαi = (bi,di) such that when
|di−bi|>ϵ we assumeα to be a topological component
of the real space. Then the resulting homologies form a
ﬁltration Hϵ1
p (D)⊂ Hϵ2
p forϵ1,ϵ 2∈ R+. If ϵ is chosen
such that certain topologically noisy features (Fasy et al.,
2014) are included in the estimate ofhphase, then at worst
the architecture is overparameterized, but still learns. Ifϵ is
such that the estimatedhphase is underrepresentitive of the
On Characterizing the Capacity of Neural Networks using Algebraic Topology
Figure 7. Topological architecture selection applied to four different datasets. The persistent homology, the histogram of topological
lifespans, and the predicted ˆhphase are indicated. For each test error plot, the best performance of one (blue), two (green), three (red), and
four (light blue) layer neural networks are given in terms of the number of hidden units on the ﬁrst layer.
topological features of a space, then at worst, the architec-
ture is underparameterized but potentially close tohphase.
As either case yields the solution or a plausibly useful seed
for other algorithm selection algorithms (Zoph & Le, 2017;
Feurer et al., 2015), we adopt the this static instantiation of
persistence homology.
In order to select an architecture (ℓ,h 0) lower-bounding
hphase, we restrict the analysis to the case of ℓ = 1 and
regress a multilinear model training on pairs
(b0,b 1)↦→ arg min
m
Ep
H(fm,D)≥ 1,β∗(D) = (b0,b 1)
over allm hidden unit single layer neural networksfm and
synthetic datasets of known homologyD from our previous
experiments. The resultant discretization of the model gives
a lower-bound estimate after applying the bound from (3.1):
ˆhphase(β0,β 1)≥β1C
ℓ
√
(β0) + 2 (4.1)
Estimating this lower-bound is at the core of neural homol-
ogy theory and is the subject of substantial future theoretical
and empirical work.
4.1. Results
In order to validate the approach, we applied topologi-
cal architecture selection to several binary datasets from
the OpenML dataset repository (Vanschoren et al., 2013):
fri_c, balance-scale, banana, phoneme, and
delta_ailerons. We compute persistent homology of
each of the two labeled classes therein and accept topo-
logical features with lifespans greater than two standard
deviations from the mean for each homological dimension.
We then estimated a lowerbound onhphase for single hid-
den layer neural networks using 4.1. Finally we trained
100 neural networks for each architecture (ℓ,h 0) where
h0∈{ 1, 3,..., 99} andℓ∈{ 1,..., 4}. During training we
record the minimum average error for eachh0 and compare
this with the estimate ˆhphase. The results are summarized
in 4.
These preliminary ﬁndings indicate that the empirically de-
rived estimate ofhphase provides a strong starting point for
architecture selection, as the minimum error at ˆhphase is
near zero in every training instance. Although the estimate
is given only in terms of 0 and 1 dimensional homology
of the data, it still performed well for higher dimensional
datasets such as phoneme and fri_c*. In failure cases,
choice ofϵ greatly affected the predictedhphase, and thus
it is imperative that more adaptive topological selection
schemes be investigated.
While our analysis and characterization is given for the the
decision regions of individual classes in a dataset, it is plau-
sible that the true decision boundary is topologically simple
despite the complexity of the classes. Although we did
not directly characterize neural network by the topology of
their decision boundaries, recent work by Varshney & Ra-
mamurthy (2015) provides an exact method for computing
the persistent homology of a decision boundary between
any number of classes in a dataset. It is the subject of future
work to provide a statistical foundation for (Varshney &
Ramamurthy, 2015) and then reanalyze the homological
capacity of neural networks in this context.
4.2. Homological Complexity of Real Data
In addition to testing topological measures of complexity
in the setting of architecture selection, we verify that com-
mon machine learning benchmark datasets have non-trivial
homology and the computation thereof is tractable.
CIFAR-10. We compute the persistent homology of several
classes of CIFAR-10 using the Python library Dionysus.
On Characterizing the Capacity of Neural Networks using Algebraic Topology
Figure 8. The persistent homology barcodes of classes in the
CIFAR-10 Datasets; The barcode for the dimensions 0 and 1 for
the ’cars’ class along side different samples. Note how different
orientations are shown.
Current algorithms for persistent homology do not deal well
with high dimensional data, so we embed the entire dataset
in R3 using local linear embedding (LLE; (Saul & Roweis,
2000)) withK = 120 neighbors. We note that an embed-
ding of any dataset to a lower dimensional subspace with
small enough error roughly preserves the static homology of
the support of the data distribution distribution by Theorem
2.2. After embedding the dataset, we take a sample of 1000
points from example class ’car’ and build a persistent ﬁltra-
tion by constructing a Vietoris-Rips complex on the data.
The resulting complex has 20833750 simplices and took 4.3
min. to generate. Finally, computation of the persistence
diagram shown in Figure 8 took 8.4 min. locked to a single
thread on a Intel Core i7 processor. The one-time cost of
computing persistent homology could easily augment any
neural architecture search.
Although we only give an analysis of dimension 2 topo-
logical features–and there is certainly higher dimensional
homological information in CIFAR-10–the persistence bar-
code diagram is rich with different components in both
H0(D) andH1(D). Intuitively, CIFAR contains pictures of
cars rotated across a range of different orientations and this
is exhibited in the homology. In particular, several holes are
born and die in the range ϵ∈ [0.15, 0.375] and one large
loop fromϵ∈ [0.625, 0.82].
UCI Datasets. We further compute the homology of three
low dimensional UCI datasets and attempt to assert the of
non-trivial , hphase. Speciﬁcally, we compute the persis-
tent homology of the majority classes in the Yeast Protein
Localization Sites, UCI Ecoli Protein Localization Sites,
and HTRU2 datasets. For these datasets no dimensional-
ity reduction was used. In Figure 8(left), the persistence
barcode exhibits two separate signiﬁcant loops (holes) at
ϵ∈ [0.19, 0.31] and ϵ∈ [0.76, 0.85], as well as two ma-
jor connected components inβ0(D). The Other persistence
diagrams are relegated to the appendix.
5. Related Work
We will place this work in the context of deep learning the-
ory as it relates to expressivity. Since the seminal work of
Cybenko (1989) which established standard universal ap-
proximation results for neural networks, many researchers
have attempted to understand the expressivity of certain neu-
ral architectures. Pascanu et al. (2013) and MacKay (2003)
provided the ﬁrst analysis relating the depth and width of
architectures to the complexity of the sublevel sets they can
express. Motivated therefrom, Bianchini et al. (2014) ex-
pressed this theme in the language of Pfefferian functions,
thereby bounding the sum of Betti numbers expressed by
sublevel sets. Finally Guss (2016) gave an account of how
topological assumptions on the input data lead to optimally
expressive architectures. In parallel, Eldan & Shamir (2016)
presented the ﬁrst analytical minimality result in expressiv-
ity theory; that is, the authors show that there are simple
functions that cannot be expressed by two layer neural net-
works without exponential dependence on input dimension.
This work spurred the work of Poole et al. (2016), Raghu
et al. (2016) which reframed expressivity in a differential
geometric lens.
Our work presents the ﬁrst method to derive expressivity
results empirically. Our topological viewpoint sits dually
with its differential geometric counterpart, and in conjunc-
tion with the work of (Poole et al., 2016) and (Bianchini
et al., 2014). This duality implies that when topological
expression is not possible, exponential differential expres-
sivity allows networks to bypass homological constraints at
the cost of adversarial sets. Furthermore, our work opens a
practical connection between the foregoing theory on neural
expressivity and architecture selection, with the potential to
substantially improve neural architecture search (Zoph &
Le, 2017) by directly computing the capacities of different
architectures.
6. Conclusion
Architectural power is closely related to the algebraic topol-
ogy of decision regions. In this work we distilled neural
network expressivity into an empirical question of the gen-
eralization capabilities of architectures with respect to the
homological complexity of learning problems. This view
allowed us to provide an empirical method for developing
tighter characterizations on the the capacity of different ar-
chitectures in addition to a principled approach to guiding
On Characterizing the Capacity of Neural Networks using Algebraic Topology
architecture selection by computation of persistent homol-
ogy on real data.
There are several potential avenues of future research in us-
ing homological complexity to better understand neural ar-
chitectures. First, a full characterization of neural networks
with convolutional linearities and state-of-the-art topologies
is a crucial next step. Our empirical results suggest that
there are exact formulas describing the of power of neural
networks to express decision boundaries with certain prop-
erties. Future theoretical work in determining these forms
would signiﬁcantly increase the efﬁciency and power of
neural architecture search, constraining the search space by
the persistent homology of the data. Additionally, we intend
on studying how the topological complexity of data changes
as it is propagated through deeper architectures.
7. Acknowledgements
We thank Greg Yang, Larry Wasserman, Guy Wilson, Dawn
Song and Peter Bartlett for useful discussions and insights.
References
Betti, E. Il nuovo cimento. Series, 2:7, 1872.
Bianchini, Monica et al. On the complexity of shallow and
deep neural network classiﬁers. In ESANN, 2014.
Bredon, Glen E. Topology and geometry , volume 139.
Springer Science & Business Media, 2013.
Carlsson, Gunnar, Ishkhanov, Tigran, De Silva, Vin, and
Zomorodian, Afra. On the local behavior of spaces of
natural images. International journal of computer vision,
76(1):1–12, 2008.
Cybenko, George. Approximation by superpositions of a
sigmoidal function. Mathematics of Control, Signals, and
Systems (MCSS), 2(4):303–314, 1989.
Daniely, Amit, Frostig, Roy, and Singer, Yoram. Toward
deeper understanding of neural networks: The power of
initialization and a dual view on expressivity. In Ad-
vances In Neural Information Processing Systems , pp.
2253–2261, 2016.
Dey, TK, Edelsbrunner, H, and Guha, S. Computational
topology, invited paper in advances in discrete and com-
putational geometry, eds. b. chazelle, je goodmann and r.
pollack. Contemporary Mathematics, AMS, 1998.
Eldan, Ronen and Shamir, Ohad. The power of depth for
feedforward neural networks. In Conference on Learning
Theory, pp. 907–940, 2016.
Fasy, Brittany Terese, Lecci, Fabrizio, Rinaldo, Alessan-
dro, Wasserman, Larry, Balakrishnan, Sivaraman, Singh,
Aarti, et al. Conﬁdence sets for persistence diagrams. The
Annals of Statistics, 42(6):2301–2339, 2014.
Fernando, Chrisantha, Banarse, Dylan, Blundell, Charles,
Zwols, Yori, Ha, David, Rusu, Andrei A., Pritzel, Alexan-
der, and Wierstra, Daan. Pathnet: Evolution chan-
nels gradient descent in super neural networks. CoRR,
abs/1701.08734, 2017. URL http://arxiv.org/
abs/1701.08734.
Feurer, Matthias, Springenberg, Jost Tobias, and Hutter,
Frank. Initializing bayesian hyperparameter optimization
via meta-learning. In AAAI, pp. 1128–1135, 2015.
Goodfellow, Ian, Bengio, Yoshua, and Courville, Aaron.
Deep Learning . MIT Press, 2016. http://www.
deeplearningbook.org.
Guss, William H. Deep function machines: Generalized
neural networks for topological layer expression. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1612.04799, 2016.
He, Kaiming, Zhang, Xiangyu, Ren, Shaoqing, and Sun,
Jian. Deep residual learning for image recognition. CoRR,
abs/1512.03385, 2015. URL http://arxiv.org/
abs/1512.03385.
Hinton, Geoffrey, Deng, Li, Yu, Dong, Dahl, George E, Mo-
hamed, Abdel-rahman, Jaitly, Navdeep, Senior, Andrew,
Vanhoucke, Vincent, Nguyen, Patrick, Sainath, Tara N,
et al. Deep neural networks for acoustic modeling in
speech recognition: The shared views of four research
groups. IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, 29(6):82–97,
2012.
Kingma, Diederik P and Ba, Jimmy. Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980,
2014.
Krizhevsky, Alex, Sutskever, Ilya, and Hinton, Geoffrey E.
Imagenet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural
networks. In Advances in neural information processing
systems, pp. 1097–1105, 2012.
MacKay, David JC. Information theory, inference and learn-
ing algorithms. Cambridge university press, 2003.
Mnih, V olodymyr, Kavukcuoglu, Koray, Silver, David,
Graves, Alex, Antonoglou, Ioannis, Wierstra, Daan, and
Riedmiller, Martin. Playing atari with deep reinforcement
learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1312.5602, 2013.
Nair, Vinod and Hinton, Geoffrey E. Rectiﬁed linear units
improve restricted boltzmann machines. In Proceedings
of the 27th international conference on machine learning
(ICML-10), pp. 807–814, 2010.
On Characterizing the Capacity of Neural Networks using Algebraic Topology
Pascanu, Razvan, Montufar, Guido, and Bengio, Yoshua. On
the number of response regions of deep feed forward net-
works with piece-wise linear activations. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1312.6098, 2013.
Poole, Ben, Lahiri, Subhaneil, Raghu, Maithreyi, Sohl-
Dickstein, Jascha, and Ganguli, Surya. Exponential ex-
pressivity in deep neural networks through transient chaos.
In Advances In Neural Information Processing Systems,
pp. 3360–3368, 2016.
Raghu, Maithra, Poole, Ben, Kleinberg, Jon, Ganguli, Surya,
and Sohl-Dickstein, Jascha. On the expressive power of
deep neural networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.05336,
2016.
Saul, Lawrence K and Roweis, Sam T. An introduction
to locally linear embedding. unpublished. Available
at: http://www. cs. toronto. edu/˜ roweis/lle/publications.
html, 2000.
Saxena, Shreyas and Verbeek, Jakob. Convolutional neural
fabrics. CoRR, abs/1606.02492, 2016. URL http://
arxiv.org/abs/1606.02492.
Simonyan, Karen and Zisserman, Andrew. Very deep con-
volutional networks for large-scale image recognition.
CoRR, abs/1409.1556, 2014. URL http://arxiv.
org/abs/1409.1556.
Smith, Samuel L, Kindermans, Pieter-Jan, and Le, Quoc V .
Don’t decay the learning rate, increase the batch size.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1711.00489, 2017.
Szegedy, Christian, Liu, Wei, Jia, Yangqing, Sermanet,
Pierre, Reed, Scott E., Anguelov, Dragomir, Erhan,
Dumitru, Vanhoucke, Vincent, and Rabinovich, An-
drew. Going deeper with convolutions. CoRR,
abs/1409.4842, 2014. URL http://arxiv.org/
abs/1409.4842.
Topaz, Chad M, Ziegelmeier, Lori, and Halverson, Tom.
Topological data analysis of biological aggregation mod-
els. PloS one, 10(5):e0126383, 2015.
Vanschoren, Joaquin, van Rijn, Jan N., Bischl, Bernd, and
Torgo, Luis. Openml: Networked science in machine
learning. SIGKDD Explorations, 15(2):49–60, 2013. doi:
10.1145/2641190.2641198. URL http://doi.acm.
org/10.1145/2641190.2641198.
Varshney, Kush R and Ramamurthy, Karthikeyan Natesan.
Persistent topology of decision boundaries. In Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 2015 IEEE In-
ternational Conference on, pp. 3931–3935. IEEE, 2015.
Wu, Yonghui, Schuster, Mike, Chen, Zhifeng, Le, Quoc V ,
Norouzi, Mohammad, Macherey, Wolfgang, Krikun,
Maxim, Cao, Yuan, Gao, Qin, Macherey, Klaus, et al.
Google’s neural machine translation system: Bridging
the gap between human and machine translation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1609.08144, 2016.
Zomorodian, Afra and Carlsson, Gunnar. Computing per-
sistent homology. Discrete & Computational Geometry,
33(2):249–274, 2005.
Zoph, Barret and Le, Quoc V . Neural architecture search
with reinforcement learning. 2017. URL https://
arxiv.org/abs/1611.01578.
On Characterizing the Capacity of Neural Networks using Algebraic Topology
A. Proofs, Conjectures, and Formal
Deﬁnitions
A.1. Homology
Homology is naturally described using the language of cat-
egory theory. LetTop 2 denote the category of topological
spaces andAb the category of abelian groups.
Deﬁnition A.1 (Homology Theory, (Bredon, 2013)). A ho-
mology theory on the onTop 2 is a functionH :Top 2→Ab
assigning to each pair (X,A ) of spaces a graded (abelian)
group{Hp(X,A )}, and to each mapf : (X,A )→ (Y,B ),
homomorphisms f∗ : Hp(X,A ) → Hp(Y,B ), together
with a natural transformation of functors∂∗ :Hp(X,A )→
Hp−1(X,A ), called the connecting homomorphism (where
we useH∗(A) to denoteH∗(A,∅)) such that the following
ﬁve axioms are satisﬁed.
1. If f ≃ g : ( X,A ) → (Y,B ) then f∗ = g∗ :
H∗(X,A )→H∗(Y,B ).
2. For the inclusionsi : A→ X andj : X→ (X,A )
the sequence sequence of inclusions and connecting
homomorphisms are exact.
3. Given the pair (X,A ) and an open set U⊂ X such
that cl(U) ⊂ int(A) then the inclusion k : (X−
U,A−U)→ (X,A ) induces an isomorphism k∗ :
H∗(X−U,A−U)→H∗(X,A )
4. For a one point space P,Hi(P ) = 0 for alli̸= 0.
5. For a topological sumX = +αXα the homomorphism
⨁
(iα)∗ :
⨁
Hn(Xα)→Hn(X)
is an isomorphism, whereiα :Xα→X is the inclu-
sion.
For related deﬁnitions and requisite notions we refer the
reader to (Bredon, 2013).
A.2. Proof of Theorem 3.1
Theorem A.2. LetX be a topological space and X + be
some open subspace. IfF⊂ 2X such thatf∈F implies
HS(f)̸=H(X +), then for allf∈F there existsA⊂X
so thatf(A∩X +) ={0} andf(A∩ (X\X +)) ={1}.
Proof. Suppose the for the sake of contraiction that for
all f ∈F , HS(f)̸= H(X +) and yet there exists an f
such that for all A⊂ X, there exists an x∈ A such that
f(x) = 1. Then takeA ={x}x∈X, and note thatf maps
each singleton into its proper partition onX. We have that
for any open subset of V ⊂ X +, f(V ) = {1}, and for
any closed subsetW⊂X\X +,f(W ) ={0}. Therefore
X + =⋃
A∈τX+ ∩X
A⊂supp(f) as the subspace topology
τX +∩X =τX +∩τX whereτX + ={A∈τX|A⊂X +}
andτX denotes the topology ofX. Likewise,int(X−)⊂
X\supp(F ) under the same logic. Therefore supp(f) has
the exact same topology as X + and so by Theorem 2.2
H(X +) = H(supp(f)) but this is a contradiction. This
completes the proof.
B. Additional Figures
See next page.
On Characterizing the Capacity of Neural Networks using Algebraic Topology
Figure 9. A scatter plot of the number of iterations required for architectures of varying hidden dimension and number of layers to
converge to 5% misclassiﬁcation error. The colors of each point denote the topological complexity of the data on which the networks were
trained. Note the emergence of convergence bands.
Figure 10. The topological persistence diagrams of several datasets. In each plot, the barcode diagram is given for 0 and 1 dimensional
features along with a 2-dimensional embedding of each dataset. Note that we do not compute the homologies of the datasets in the
embeeding with the exception of CIFAR.
On Characterizing the Capacity of Neural Networks using Algebraic Topology
Figure 11. Additional topological phase transitions in low dimensional neural networks as the homological complexity of the data
increases. The upper right corner of each plot is a dataset on which the neural networks of increasing ﬁrst layer hidden dimension are
trained.