TOPOLOGY OF DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS
GREGORY NAITZAT, ANDREY ZHITNIKOV, AND LEK-HENG LIM
Abstract. We study how the topology of a data set M =Ma∪Mb⊆ Rd, representing two classes
of objects a and b in a binary classiﬁcation problem, changes as it passes through the layers of
a well-trained neural network, i.e., one with perfect accuracy on its training set and a near-zero
generalization error (≈ 0.01%). The goal is to shed light on two well-known mysteries in deep
neural networks: (i) a nonsmooth activation function like ReLU outperforms a smooth one like
hyperbolic tangent; (ii) successful neural network architectures rely on having many layers, despite
the fact that a shallow network is able to approximate any function arbitrary well. We performed
extensive experiments on the persistent homology of a wide range of point cloud data sets, both real
and simulated. The results consistently demonstrate the following: (1) Neural networks operate
by changing topology, transforming a topologically complicated data set into a topologically simple
one as it passes through the layers. No matter how complicated the topology of M we begin with,
when passed through a well-trained neural networkf : Rd→ Rp, there is invariably a vast reduction
in the Betti numbers of both components Ma and Mb; in fact they nearly always reduce to their
lowest possible values: βk
(
f(Mi)
)
= 0 for k≥ 1 and β0
(
f(Mi)
)
= 1, i = a,b . Furthermore, (2)
the reduction in Betti numbers is signiﬁcantly faster for ReLU activation compared to hyperbolic
tangent activation as the former deﬁnes nonhomeomorphic maps that change topology, whereas the
latter deﬁnes homeomorphic maps that preserve topology. Lastly, (3) shallow and deep networks
transform the same data set somewhat diﬀerently — a shallow network operates mainly through
changing geometry and changes topology only in its ﬁnal layers, a deep one spreads topological
changes more evenly across all layers.
1. Overview
A key insight of topological data analysis is that “ data has shape ” [6, 7]. That data sets often
have nontrivial topologies, which may be exploited in their analysis, is now a widely accepted
principle with abundant examples across multiple disciplines: dynamical systems [24], medicine
[30, 42], genomics [47], neuroscience [18], time series [48], etc. An early striking example came
from computer vision, where [8] showed that naturally occurring image patches reside on a low-
dimensional manifold that has the topology of a Klein bottle.
We will study how modern deep neural networks transform topologies of data sets, with the
goal of shedding light on their breathtaking yet somewhat mysterious eﬀectiveness. Indeed, we
seek to show that neural networks operate by changing the topology (i.e., shape) of data. The
relative eﬃcacy of ReLU activation over traditional sigmoidal activations can be explained by the
diﬀerent speeds with which they change topology — a ReLU-activated neural network (which is
not a homeomorphism) is able to sharply reduce Betti numbers but not a sigmoidal-activated one
(which is a homeomorphism). Also, the higher the topological complexity of the data, the greater
the depth of the network required to reduce it, explaining the need to have an adequate number of
layers.
We would like to point out that the idea of changing the topology of space to facilitate a machine
learning goal is not as esoteric as one might imagine. For example, it is implicit in kernel methods
[51] — a data set with two components inseparable by a hyperplane is embedded in a higher-
dimensional space where the embedded images of the components are separable by a hyperplane.
Key words and phrases. Neural networks, topology change, topological data analysis, Betti numbers, topological
complexity, persistent homology.
1
arXiv:2004.06093v1  [cs.LG]  13 Apr 2020
2 G. NAITZAT, A. ZHITNIKOV, AND L.-H. LIM
Note that dimension is a topological invariant, changing dimension is changing topology. We will
see that a ReLU-activated neural network with many layers eﬀects topological changes primarily
through changing Betti numbers, another topological invariant.
Our study diﬀers from current approaches in two important ways. Many existing studies either
(i) analyze neural networks in an asymptotic or extreme regime, where the number of neurons in
each layer or the number of layers becomes unbounded or inﬁnite, leading to conclusions that really
pertain to neural networks of somewhat unrealistic architectures; or (ii) they focus on what a neural
network does to a single object, e.g., an image of a cat, and examine how that object changes as
it passes through the layers. While we do not dispute the value of such approaches, we would like
to contrast them with ours: We study what a neural network with a realistic architecture does
to an entire class of objects. It is common to ﬁnd expositions (especially in the mass media) of
deep neural networks that purport to show their workings by showing how an image of a cat is
transformed as it passes through the layers. We think this is misguided — one should be looking
at the entire manifold of cat images, not a single point on that manifold (i.e., a single cat image).
This is the approach we undertake in our article.
Figure 1 illustrates what we mean by ‘changing topology’. The two subﬁgures are caricatures
of real results (see Figures 2, 11, 12, 13, for the true versions obtained via actual Betti numbers
computations and projections to the principal components.)
Figure 1. Progression of Betti numbers β(X) = ( β0(X),β 1(X),β 2(X)). Left: β(red):
(1, 2, 0) → (1, 2, 0) → (2, 1, 0) → (2, 0, 0) → (1, 0, 0) → (1, 0, 0); β(green): (2 , 2, 0) →
(2, 2, 0)→ (2, 1, 0)→ (2, 0, 0)→ (2, 0, 0)→ (1, 0, 0). Right: β(red): (3, 0, 0)→ (2, 0, 0)→
(1, 0, 0)→ (1, 0, 0); β(green): (1, 0, 3)→ (1, 0, 2)→ (1, 0, 1)→ (1, 0, 0).
In both subﬁgures, we begin with a three-dimensional manifold M =Ma∪Mb, comprising two
disjoint submanifoldsMa (green) andMb (red) entangled in a topologically nontrivial manner, and
track its progressive transformation into a topologically simple manifold comprising a green ball
and a red ball. In the left box, M is initially the union of the two green solid tori Ma, interlocked
with the red solid ﬁgure-eight Mb. In the right box, M is initially a union of Ma, the green solid
ball with three voids inside, and Mb, three red balls each placed within one of the three voids of
Ma. The topological simpliﬁcation in both boxes are achieved via a reduction in the Betti numbers
of both Ma andMb so that eventually we haveβk(Mi) = 0 for k≥ 1 and β0(Mi) = 1,i =a,b . Our
main goal is to provide (what we hope is) incontrovertible evidence that this picture captures the
actual workings of a well-trained1 neural network in a binary classiﬁcation problem where Ma and
Mb represent the two classes.
In reality, the manifold M =Ma∪Mb would have to be replaced by a point cloud data set, i.e.,
a ﬁnite set of points sampled with noise from M. The notion of persistent homology allows us to
give meaning to the topology of point cloud data and estimate the Betti numbers of its underlying
manifold.
1.1. Key ﬁndings. This work is primarily an empirical study — we performed more than 10,000
experiments on real and simulated data sets of varying topological complexities and have made our
1One with near zero generalization error.
TOPOLOGY OF DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS 3
codes available for reader’s further experimentations.2 We summarize our most salient observations
and discuss their implications:
(i) For a ﬁxed data set and ﬁxed network architecture, topological changes eﬀected by a well-
trained network are robust across diﬀerent training instances and follow a similar proﬁle.
(ii) Using smooth activations like hyperbolic tangent results in a slow down of topological simpli-
ﬁcation compared to nonsmooth activations like ReLU or Leaky ReLU.
(iii) The initial layers mostly induce only geometric changes, it is in deeper layers that topological
changes take place. Moreover, as we reduce network depth, the burden of producing topolog-
ical simpliﬁcation is not spread uniformly across layers but remains concentrated in the last
layers. The last layers see a greater reduction in topological complexity than the initial layers.
Observation (ii) provides a plausible answer to a widely asked question [39, 34, 19]: What
makes rectiﬁed activations such as ReLU and its variants perform better than smooth sigmoidal
activations? We posit that it is not a matter of smooth versus nonsmooth but that a neural
network with sigmoid activation is a homeomorphic map that preserves topology whereas one with
ReLU activation is a nonhomeomorphic map that can change topology. It is much harder to
change topology with homeomorphisms; in fact, mathematically it is impossible; but maps like the
hyperbolic tangent achieve it in practice via rounding errors. Note that in IEEE ﬁnite-precision
arithmetic, the hyperbolic tangent is eﬀectively a piecewise linear step function:
tanhδ(x) =



+1 if ﬂ(tanh( x))> 1−δ,
ﬂ(tanh(x)) if − 1 +δ≤ ﬂ(tanh(x))≤ 1−δ,
−1 if ﬂ(tanh( x))<−1 +δ,
where ﬂ(x) denotes ﬂoating point representation of x∈ R, and δ > 0 is the unit roundoﬀ , i.e.,
δ = ϵ/2 with ϵ = inf{x >0 : ﬂ(1 + x)̸= 1} the machine epsilon [45]. Applied coordinatewise to
a vector, tanh : Rn→ (−1, 1)n is a homeomorphism of Rn to (−1, 1)n and necessarily preserves
topology; but tanh δ : Rn→ [−1, 1]n is not a homeomorphism and thus has the ability to change
topology. We also observe that lowering the ﬂoating point precision increases the value of δ (e.g.,
for double precision δ = 2−54, for half precision3δ = 2−9), which has the eﬀect of coarsening tanhδ,
making it even further from a homeomorphism and thus more eﬀective at changing topology. We
suspect that this may account for the paradoxical superior performance of lower precision arithmetic
in deep neural networks [11, 20, 23].
The ReLU activation, on the other hand, is far from a homeomorphism (for starters, it is not
injective) even in exact arithmetic. Indeed, if changing topology is the goal, then a composition of
an aﬃne map with ReLU activation, ν : Rn→ Rn, x↦→ max(Ax +b, 0), is a quintessential tool
for achieving it — any topologically complicated part of M⊆ Rn can be aﬃnely moved outside
the nonnegative orthant and collapsed to a single point by the rectiﬁer. We see this in action in
Figure 2, which unlike Figure 1, is a genuine example of a ReLU neural network trained to perfect
accuracy on a two-dimensional manifold data set, where Ma comprises ﬁve red disks in a square
M and Mb = M\Ma is the remaining green portion with the ﬁve disks removed. The ‘folding’
transformations in Figure 2 clearly require many-to-one maps and can never be achieved by any
homeomorphism.
The eﬀectiveness of ReLU activation over sigmoidal activations is often attributed to the former’s
avoidance of the vanishing/exploding gradient problem. Our results in Section 6 indicate that
this does not give the full explanation. Leaky ReLU and ReLU both avoid vanishing/exploding
gradients, yet they transform data sets in markedly diﬀerent manners — for one, ReLU reduces
topology faster than Leaky ReLU. The sharpness of the gradients is clearly not what matters most;
on the other hand, the topological perspective perfectly explains why.
2https://github.com/topnn/topnn_framework.
3Assuming the BFloat16 ﬂoating-point format used in TensorFlow.
4 G. NAITZAT, A. ZHITNIKOV, AND L.-H. LIM
Figure 2. We see how the data set is transformed after passing through layers 2 , 3,..., 8
of a ReLU network with three neurons in each layer, well-trained to detect ﬁve disks in a
square. β(red): (5, 0)→ (4, 0)→ (4, 0)→ (4, 0)→ (2, 0)→ (1, 0)→ (1, 0).
Observation (iii) addresses another perennial paradox [27, 16, 52]: Why does a neural network
with more layers work better, despite the well-known universal approximation property that any
function can be approximated arbitrarily well by a two-layer one? We posit that the traditional
approximation-theoretic view of neural networks is insuﬃcient here; instead, the proper perspective
is that of a topologically complicated input getting progressively simpliﬁed as it passes through the
layers of a neural network. Observation (iii) accounts for the role of the additional layers —
topological changes are minor in the ﬁrst few layers and occur mainly in the later layers, thus a
complicated data set requires many more layers to simplify.
We emphasize that our goal is to explain the mechanics of what happens from one layer to the
next, and to see what role each attribute of the network’s architecture — depth, width, activation
— serves in changing topology. Note that we are not merely stating that a neural network is a
blackbox that collapses each class to a component but how that is achieved, i.e., what goes on
inside the blackbox.
1.2. Relations with and departures from prior works. As in topological data analysis, we
make use of persistent homology and quantify topological complexity in terms of Betti numbers;
we track how these numbers change as a point cloud data set passes through the layers of a neural
network. But that is the full extent of any similarity with topological data analysis. In fact, from
our perspective, topological data analysis and neural networks have opposite goals — the former
is largely concerned with reading the shape of data, whereas the latter is about writing the shape
of data; not unlike the relation between computer vision and computer graphics, wherein one is
interested the inverse problems of the other. Incidentally, this shows that a well-trained neural
network applied in reverse can be used as a tool for labeling components of a complex data set and
their interrelation, serving a role similar to mapper [53] in topological data analysis. This idea has
been explored in [46, 40].
To the best of our knowledge, our approach towards elucidating the inner workings of a neural
network by studying how the topology, as quantiﬁed by persistent Betti numbers, of a point cloud
data set changes as it passes through the layers has never been done before. The key conclusion of
these studies, namely, that the role of a neural network is primarily as a topology-changing map, is
also novel as far as we know. Nevertheless, we would like to acknowledge a Google Brain blog post
[44] that inspired our work — it speculated on how neural networks may act as homeomorphisms
that distort geometry, but stopped short of making the leap to topology-changing maps.
There are other works that employ Betti numbers in the analysis of neural networks. [3] did a
purely theoretical study of upper bounds on the topological complexity (i.e., sum of Betti numbers)
of the decision boundaries of neural networks with smooth sigmoidal activations; [49] did a similar
study with a diﬀerent measure of topological complexity. [21] studied the empirical relation between
the topological complexity of a data set and the minimal network capacity required to classify it.
[50] used persistent homology to monitor changes in the weights of neural network during training
and proposed an early stopping criteria based on persistent homology.
TOPOLOGY OF DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS 5
1.3. Outline. In Section 2 we introduce, in an informal way, the main topological concepts used
throughout this article. This is supplemented by a more careful and detailed treatment in Section 3,
which provides a self-contained exposition of simplicial homology and persistent homology tailored
to our needs. Section 4 contains a precise formulation of the problem we study, speciﬁes what is
tracked empirically, and addresses some caveats. Section 5 introduces our methodology for tracking
topological changes and implementation details. We present the results from our empirical studies
with discussions in Section 6, veriﬁed our ﬁndings on real-world data in Section 7, and conclude
with some speculative discussions in Section 8.
2. Quantifying topology
In this article, we rely entirely on Betti numbers βk(M) to quantify topology as they are the
simplest topological invariants that capture the shape of a space M ⊆ Rd, have intuitive inter-
pretations, and are readily computable within the framework of persistent homology for a point
cloud data set sampled fromM. The zeroth Betti number, β0(M), counts the number of connected
components in M; the kth Betti number, βk(M),k≥ 1, is informally the number of k-dimensional
holes in M. In particular, βk(M) = 0 when k > das there is no ( d + 1)-dimensional holes in
d-dimensional space. So for M⊆ Rd, we write β(M) := (β0(M),β 1(M),...,β d(M)) — these num-
bers capture the shape or topology of M, as one can surmise from Figure 3. So whenever we refer
to ‘topology’ in this article, we implicitly mean β(M).
(a) (b) (c) (d)
(e) (f) (g)
Manifold M⊆ R3 β(M)
(a) Single contractible manifold (1 , 0, 0)
(b) Five contractible manifolds (5 , 0, 0)
(c) Sphere (1 , 0, 1)
(d) Solid torus (ﬁlled) (1 , 1, 0)
(e) Surface of torus (hollow) (1 , 2, 1)
(f) Genus two surface (hollow) (1 , 4, 1)
(g) Torso surface (hollow) (1 , 3, 0)
Figure 3. Manifolds in R3 and their Betti numbers.
If M has no holes and can be continuously (i.e., without tearing) deformed to a point, then
β0(M) = 1 and βk(M) = 0 for all k ≥ 1; such a space is called contractible. The simplest
noncontractible space is a circle S1⊆ R2, which has a single connected component and a single
one-dimensional hole, so β0(S1) = 1 = β1(S1) and βk(S1) = 0 for all k≥ 2. Figure 3 has a few
more examples.
Intuitively, the more holes a space has, the more complex its topology. In other words, the larger
the numbers in β(M), the more complicated the topology of M. As such, we deﬁne its topological
complexity by
ω(M) :=β0(M) +β1(M) +··· +βd(M). (2.1)
While not as well-known as the Euler characteristic (which is an alternating signed sum of the Betti
numbers), the topological complexity is also a classical notion in topology, appearing most notably
in Morse theory [35]; one of its best known result is that the topological complexity of M gives
a lower bound for the number of stationary points of a function f : M→ R with nondegenerate
Hessians. It also appears in many other contexts [36, 1], including neural networks. We highlight in
particular the work of [3] that we mentioned earlier, which studies the topological complexity of the
decision boundary of neural networks with activations that are Pfaﬃan functions [55, 17]. These
include sigmoidal activations but not the ReLU nor leaky ReLU activations studied in this article.
For piecewise linear activations like ReLU and leaky ReLU, the most appropriate theoretical upper
6 G. NAITZAT, A. ZHITNIKOV, AND L.-H. LIM
bounds for topological complexity of decision boundaries are likely given by the number of linear
regions [38, 56].
The goal of our article is diﬀerent, we are interested not in the shape of the decision boundary of
anl-layer neural networkνl : Rd→ Rp but in the shapes of the input M⊆ Rd, outputνl(M)⊆ Rq,
and all its intermediate layers νk(M), k = 1,...,l − 1. By so doing, we may observe how the
shape of M is transformed as it passes through the layers of a well-trained neural network, thereby
elucidating its workings. In other words, we would like to track the Betti numbers
β(M)→β(ν1(M))→β(ν2(M))→···→ β(νl−1(M))→β(νl(M)).
To do this in reality, we will have to estimate β(M) from a point cloud data set, i.e., a ﬁnite set of
points T⊆M sampled from M, possibly with noise. The next section will describe the procedure
to do this via persistent homology, which is by now a standard tool in topological data analysis.
Readers who do not want to be bothered with the details just need to know that one may reliably
estimate β(M) by sampling points from M; those who like to know the details may consult the
next section. The main idea is that the Betti numbers of M may be estimated by constructing
a simplicial complex from T in one of several ways that depend on a ‘persistent parameter’, and
then using simplicial homology to compute the Betti numbers of this simplicial complex. Roughly
speaking, the ‘persistent parameter’ allows one to pick the right scale at which the point cloud T
should be sampled so as to give a faithful estimation of β(M). Henceforth whenever we speak of
β(M), we mean the Betti numbers estimated in this fashion.
For simplicity of the preceding discussion, we have used M as a placeholder for any manifold.
Take say a handwritten digits classiﬁcation problem (see Section 7), then M =M0∪M1∪···∪ M9
has ten components, with Mi the manifold of all possible handwritten digits i∈{ 0, 1,..., 9}. Here
we are not interested in β(M) per se but in β(νk(Mi)) for all k = 0, 1,...,l and i = 0, 1,..., 9 —
so that we may see how each component is transformed as M passes through the layers, i.e., we
will need to sample points from each of νk(Mi) to estimate its Betti numbers, for each component
i and at each layer k.
3. Algebraic topology and persistent homology background
This section may be skipped by readers who are already familiar with persistent homology or are
willing to take on faith what we wrote in the last two paragraphs of the last section. Here we will
introduce background knowledge in algebraic topology — simplicial complex, homology, simplicial
homology — and provide a brief exposition on selected aspects of topological data analysis —
Vietoris–Rips complex, persistent homology, practical homology computations — that we need for
our purposes.
3.1. Simplicial complexes. A k-dimensional simplex, or k-simplex, σ in Rd, is the convex hull
of k + 1 aﬃnely independent points v0,...,v k∈ Rd. A 0-simplex is a point, a 1-simplex is a line
segment, a 2-simplex is a triangle, and a 3-simplex is a tetrahedron. A k-simplex is represented
by listing the set of its k + 1 vertices and denoted σ = [v0,...,v k]. The faces of a k-simplex
are simplices of dimensions 0 to k− 1 formed by convex hulls of proper subsets of its vertex set
{v0,...,v k}. For example, the faces of a line segment/1-simplex are its end points, which are 0-
simplices; the faces of a triangle/2-simplex are its three sides, which are 1-simplices, and its three
vertices, which are 0-simplices.
Anm-dimensional geometrical simplicial complex K in Rd is a ﬁnite collection of simplices in Rd
of dimensions at most m that are (i) glued together along faces, i.e., any intersection between two
simplices in K is necessary a face of both of them; and (ii) include all faces of all its simplices, e.g.,
if the simplex σ1 = [v0,v 1,v 2] is in K, then the simplices [v0,v 1], [v1,v 2], [v0,v 2], [v0], [v1], [v2] must
all also belong to K. Behind each geometrical simplicial complex is an abstract simplicial complex
— a list of simplices K ={σ1,σ 2,...,σ n} with the property that if τ⊆σ∈K, then τ∈K. This
TOPOLOGY OF DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS 7
combinatorial description of an abstract simplicial complex is exactly how we describe a graph, i.e.,
1-dimensional simplicial complex, as an abstract collection of edges, i.e., 1-simplices, comprising
pairs of vertices. Conversely, any abstract simplicial complex can be realized geometrically as a
geometrical simplicial complex in Rd like in Figure 4, an example of a 3-dimensional simplicial
complex in R3. The abstract description of a simplicial complex allows us to treat its simplices as
elements in a vector space, a key to deﬁne simplicial homology, as we will see in Section 3.3.
e
f
g
h
aℓ
b
c
d
i
j
k
aℓ
b
c
d
i
j
k
Figure 4. A geometrical simplicial complex in R3 that is a geometrical realization of an
abstract simplicial complex K ={[a,b,c,d ], [e,f,g ],..., [e,b ],..., [a], [b],..., [ℓ]} comprising
32 simplices: a single 3-simplex [ a,b,c,d ], ﬁve 2-simplices such as [a,c,d ] and [e,f,g ], eigh-
teen 1-simplices such as [e,b ] and [g,h ], fourteen 0-simplices [a], [b],..., [ℓ]. Note that in the
geometrical simplicial complex, the simplices intersect along faces.
3.2. Homology and Betti numbers. Homology is an abstract way to encode the topology of
a space by means of a chain of vector spaces and linear maps. We refer readers to [31] for an
elementary treatment requiring nothing more than linear algebra and graph theory. Here we will
give an even simpler treatment restricted to F2 ={0, 1}, the ﬁeld of two elements with arithmetic
performed modulo 2, which is enough for this article.
LetC0,C 1,...,C d be vector spaces over F2. Let ∂k :Ck→Ck−1 be linear maps called boundary
operators that satisfy the condition that “a boundary of a boundary is trivial,” i.e.,
∂k◦∂k+1 = 0 (3.1)
for all k = 0,...,d . A chain complex refers to the sequence
0
∂d+1
−−−→Cd
∂d
−→Cd−1
∂d−1
−−−→···
∂k+1
−−−→Ck
∂k
−→Ck−1
∂k−1
−−−→···∂2
−→C1
∂1
−→C0
∂0
−→0,
where we set Cd+1 = C−1 = 0, the trivial subspace. The elements in the image of ∂k are called
boundaries and elements in the kernel of ∂k−1 are called cycles. Clearly ker(∂k) and im(∂k+1) are
both subspaces of Ck and by (3.1),
Bk := im(∂k+1)⊆ ker(∂k) =:Zk.
We may form the quotient vector space
Hk :=Zk/Bk = ker(∂k)/ im(∂k+1), k = 0, 1,...,d,
and we will call it the kth homology group — the ‘group’ here refers to the structure of Hk as an
abelian group under addition. The elements of Hk are called homology classes; note that these are
cosets or equivalence classes of the form
[z] =z +Bk ={z +b∈Zk :b∈Bk}. (3.2)
In particular [z +b] = [z] for any b∈Bk. The dimension of Hk as a vector space is denoted
βk := dim(Hk), k = 0, 1,...,d.
8 G. NAITZAT, A. ZHITNIKOV, AND L.-H. LIM
This has special topological signiﬁcance when Hk is the homology group of a topological space like
a simplicial complex K and is called the kth Betti number ofK. Intuitively βk counts the number
of k-dimensional holes in K. Note that by deﬁnition, Hk has a basis comprising homology classes
[z1],..., [zβk] for some z1,...,z βk∈Zk⊆Ck.
3.3. Simplicial homology. We present a very simple exposition of simplicial homology tailored
to our purposes. The simpliﬁcation stems partly from our working over a ﬁeld of two elements
F2 :={0, 1}. In particular −1 = +1 and we do not need to concern with signs.
Given an abstract simplicial complex K, we deﬁne an F2-vector space Ck(K) in the following
way: Let K(k) ={σ1,...,σ m} be the set of all k-dimensional simplices in K. Then an element of
Ck(K) is a formal linear combination:
m∑
j=1
njσj, n j = 0 or 1.
In other words, Ck(K) is a vector space over F2 with K(k) as a basis.
The boundary operators ∂k :Ck(K)→Ck−1(K) are deﬁned on a k-simplex σ = [v0,...,v k] by
∂kσ :=
k∑
j=0
[v0,..., ˆvj,...,v k], (3.3)
where ˆvj indicates that vj is omitted from σ, and extended linearly to all of Ck(K), i.e.,
∂k
( m∑
j=1
njσj
)
:=
m∑
j=1
nj∂kσj.
For example, ∂1[a,b ] = a +b, ∂2[a,b,c ] = [a,b ] + [b,c ] + [c,a ], ∂2([a,b,c ] + [d,e,f ]) = ∂2[a,b,c ] +
∂2[d,e,f ].
Working over F2 simpliﬁes calculations enormously. In particular, it is easy to check that ∂k◦
∂k+1 = 0 for all k = 0,...,d , as each (k− 2)-simplex appears twice in the resulting sum and 2 = 0
in F2. Thus (3.1) holds and ∂k :Ck(K)→Ck−1(K), k = 0,...,d + 1 form a chain complex. The
kth homology of the simplicial complex K is then Hk(K) = ker(∂k)/ im(∂k+1) with ∂k as deﬁned
in (3.3). Working over F2 also guarantees that Hk(K) takes the simple form Fβk
2 where βk is the
kth Betti number, i.e.,
βk(K) = dim
(
Hk(K)
)
= nullity(∂k)− rank(∂k+1), (3.4)
for k = 0, 1,...,d . Let mk :=|K(k)|, the number of k-simplices in K. To compute βk(K), note
that with the k-simplices in K(k) as basis, ∂k is an mk−1×mk matrix with entries in F2 and the
problem in (3.4) reduces to linear algebra over {0, 1} with modulo 2 arithmetic. While this seems
innocuous, the cost of computing Betti numbers becomes prohibitive when the size of the simplicial
complex|K| =m0 +m1 +··· +md is large. The number of simplices in a d-dimensional simplicial
complex K is bounded above by
|K|≤
d∑
i=0
( n
i + 1
)
(3.5)
where n is the size of the vertex set, i.e., n =m0, and the bound is obtained by summing over the
maximal number of simplices of each dimension. The cost of computing β(K) is≈O(|K|2.38) [54].
We conclude with a discussion of simplicial maps, which we will need in persistent homology. Let
K1 andK2 be two abstract simplicial complexes. A simplicial map is a map deﬁned on their vertex
setsf :K(0)
1 →K(0)
2 so that for each simplex σ = [v0,...,v k]∈K1, we have that [f(v0),...,f (vk)]
TOPOLOGY OF DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS 9
is a simplex in K2. Such a map induces a map between chain complexes that we will also denote
byf, slightly abusing notation, deﬁned by
f :Ck(K1)→Ck(K2),
m∑
j=1
njσj↦→
m∑
j=1
njf(σj),
that in turn induces a map between homologies
Hk(f) :Hk(K1)→Hk(K2),
[ m∑
j=1
njσj
]
↦→
[ m∑
j=1
njf(σj)
]
(3.6)
for all k = 0, 1,...,d + 1. Recall that [z]∈Hk is a shorthand for homology class (3.2).
The composition of two simplicial maps f :K(0)
1 →K(0)
2 andg :K(0)
2 →K(0)
3 is also a simplicial
mapg◦f :K(0)
1 →K(0)
3 and thus induces a map between homologiesHk(g◦f) :Hk(K1)→Hk(K3)
for any k = 0, 1,...,d + 1. For the type of simplicial complex (Vietoris–Rips) and simplicial maps
(inclusions) we consider in this article, we have that Hk(g◦f) =Hk(g)◦Hk(f), a property known
as functoriality.
3.4. Vietoris–Rips complex. There are several ways to obtain a simplicial complex from a point
cloud data set but one stands out for its simplicity and widespread adoption in topological data
analysis. Note that a point cloud data set is simply a ﬁnite set of n points X⊆ Rd. We will build
an abstract simplicial complex K with vertex set K(0) =X.
Letδ be a metric on Rd. The Vietoris–Rips complex at scale ε≥ 0 on X is denoted by VRε(X)
and deﬁned to be the simplicial complex whose vertex set is X and whose k-simplices comprise all
simplices [x0,...,x k] satisfying δ(xi,xj)≤ 2ε for all i,j = 0, 1,...,k . In other words,
VRε(X) :=
{
[x0,...,x k] :δ(xi,xj)≤ 2ε, x0,...,x k∈X, k= 0, 1,...,n
}
.
It follows immediately from deﬁnition that VR ε(X) is an abstract simplicial complex. Note that
it depends on two things — the scale ε and the choice of metric δ. Figure 5 shows an example of
Vietoris–Rips complex constructed from a point cloud data set of ten points in R2 at three diﬀerent
scales ε = 0.15, 0.4, 0.6 and with δ given by the Euclidean norm.
For a point cloud X⊆M⊆ Rd sampled from a manifold M embedded in Rd, the most appro-
priate metric δ is the geodesic distance on M and not the Euclidean norm on Rd. This is usually
estimated from X using the graph geodesic distance as we will see in Section 5.3.
WhenX is sampled from a manifoldM⊆ Rd, then for a dense enough sample, and at suﬃciently
small scale, the topology of VR ε(X) recovers the true topology M in an appropriate sense, made
precise in the following result in [43]:
Proposition 3.1 (Niyogi–Smale–Weinberger). Let X ={x1,...,x n}⊆ Rd be (ε/2)-dense in a
compact Riemannian manifold M ⊆ Rd, i.e., for every p ∈ M, there exists x ∈ X such that
∥p−x∥<ε/ 2. Let τ be the condition number of M. Then for any ε<
√
3τ/5, the union of balls
V =⋃n
i=1Bε(xi) deformation retracts to M. In particular, the homology of V equals the homology
of M.
Roughly speaking the condition number of a manifold embedded in Rd encodes its local and
global curvature properties but the details are too technical for us to go into here.
3.5. Persistent homology. The Vietoris–Rips complex VRε(X) of a point cloud data set involves
a parameter ε. Here we will discuss how this may be determined.
The homology classes, are very sensitive to small changes. For example, punching a small hole
in a sphere has little eﬀect on its geometry but has large consequence on its topology — even a
very small hole would kill the H2 homology class, turning a sphere into a topological disk. This
also aﬀects the estimation of Betti numbers of a manifold from a subset of sampled point cloud
10 G. NAITZAT, A. ZHITNIKOV, AND L.-H. LIM
ε = 0.3 0.31 0 .39
ε = 0.15
→|| ←
Figure 5. Left: Vietoris–Rips complex on ten points in R2 at scales ε = 0.15, 0.4, 0.6.
Right: Persistence barcodes diagram obtained from ﬁltration of the Vietoris–Rips complex
with scale ε varying from 0 to 4. Barcodes show two most prominent topological features
of the point cloud, the long black line at the bottom and the long red line near the top,
revealing the topology of a circle, i.e.,β0 =β1 = 1. A 0-homology class dies at timesε = 0.3,
0.31, and 0.39; a 1-homology class is simultaneously born at time ε = 0.39.
data: there are many scenarios where moving a single point can signiﬁcantly change the homology
estimates. Persistent homology [15] addresses this problem by blending geometry and topology. It
allows one to reliably estimate the Betti numbers of a manifold from a point cloud data set, and
to a large extent avoids the problem of the extreme sensitivity of topology to perturbations. In
machine learning lingo, Betti numbers are features associated with the point cloud, and persistent
homology enables one to identify the features that are robust to noise.
Informally, the idea of persistent homology is to introduce a geometric scale ε that varies from
0 to∞ into homology calculations. At a scale of zero, VR 0(X) ={[x] : x∈ X} is a collection of
0-dimensional simplices with β0 =|X| and all other Betti numbers zero. In machine learning lingo
the simplicial VR 0(X) ‘overﬁts’ the data X, giving us a discrete topological space. As ε increases,
more and more distant points come together to form higher and higher-dimensional simplices in
VRε(X) and its topology becomes richer. But as ε→∞ , eventually all points inX become vertices
of a single |X|-dimensional simplex, giving us a contractible topological space. So at the extreme
ends ε = 0 and ε→∞ , we have trivial (discrete and indiscrete) topologies and the true answer
we seek lies somewhere in between — to obtain a ‘right’ scale ε∗, we use the so-called persistence
barcodes. Figure 5 shows an example of a persistence barcode diagram. This is the standard output
of persistent homology calculations and it provides a summary of the evolution of topology across
all scales. Generally speaking, a persistence barcode is an interval [ ε,ε′] where its left-end point
ε is the scale at which the new feature appears or born; and its right-end point ε′ is the scale at
which that feature disappears or die. The length of the interval ε′−ε is the persistence of that
feature. Features that are non-robust to perturbations will produce short intervals; conversely,
features that persist long enough, i.e., produce long intervals, are thought to be prominent features
of the underlying manifold. For our purpose, the feature in question will always be a homology class
in kth homology group. The collection of all persistence barcodes over k = 0, 1,...,d then gives
us our persistence barcode diagram. If we sample a point cloud satisfying Proposition 3.1 from a
sphere with a small punctured hole, we expect to see a single prominent interval corresponding to
β2 = 1, and a short interval corresponding to the small hole. The persistence barcode would allow
us to identify a scale ε∗ at which all prominent topological features of M are represented, assuming
that such a scale exists. In the following we will assume that we are interested in selecting ε∗ from
a list of ﬁnitely many scales ε0<ε 1<··· <ε m but that they could go as ﬁne as we want. For our
purpose, the simplicial complex below are taken to be Kj = VR(X,εj), j = 0, 1,...,m , but the
following discussion holds more generally.
TOPOLOGY OF DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS 11
We provide the details for computing persistence barcodes for homology groups, or persistent
homology in short. This essentially tracks the evolution of homology in a ﬁltration of simplicial
complexes, which is chain of a nested simplicial complexes
K0⊆K1⊆K2⊆···⊆ Km. (3.7)
We let fj : Kj ↪→ Kj+1, j = 1,...,m − 1 denote the inclusion maps where each simplex of Kj is
sent to the same simplex in Kj⊆ Kj+1 and regarded as a simplex in Kj+1. As fj is obviously a
simplicial map and induces a linear map Hk(fj) between the homologies of Hk(Kj) and Hk(Kj+1)
as discussed in Section 3.3, composing inclusions fj+p◦··· ◦fj gives us a linear map between any
two complexes in a ﬁltrationHk(Kj) andHk(Kj+p),j = 0, 1,...,m ,p = 1, 2,...,m −j. The index
j is often referred to as ‘time’ in this context. As such, for any i < j, one can tell whether two
simplices belonging to two diﬀerent homology classes in Hk(Ki) are mapped to the same homology
class in Hk(Kj) — if this happens, one of the homology class is said to have died while the other
has persisted from time i to j. If a homology class in Hk(Kj+1) is not in the image of Hk(fj), we
say that its homology class is born at time j + 1. The persistence barcodes simply keep track of
the birth and death times of the homology classes.
To be completely formal, we have the two-dimensional complex called apersistent complex shown
in Figure 6 with horizontal maps given by boundary maps ∂k : Ck(Kj)→ Ck−1(Kj) and vertical
maps given by simplicial mapsfj :Ck(Kj)→Ck(Kj+1). Thanks to a well-known structure theorem
[57] which guarantees that a barcodes diagram completely describes the structure of a persistent
complex in an appropriate sense, we may avoid persistent complexes like Figure 6 and work entirely
with persistence barcodes diagram like the one on the right of Figure 5.
0 Cd(K1) Cd−1(K1) · · · Ck(K1) Ck−1(K1) · · · C1(K1) C0(K1) 0
0 Cd(K2) Cd−1(K2) · · · Ck(K2) Ck−1(K2) · · · C1(K2) C0(K2) 0
0 Cd(K3) Cd−1(K3) · · · Ck(K3) Ck−1(K3) · · · C1(K3) C0(K3) 0
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
0 Cd(Km) Cd−1(Km) · · · Ck(Km) Ck−1(Km) · · · C1(Km) C0(Km) 0
∂d+1 ∂d ∂d−1 ∂k+1 ∂k ∂k−1 ∂2 ∂1 ∂0
∂d+1 ∂d ∂d−1 ∂k+1 ∂k ∂k−1 ∂2 ∂1 ∂0
∂d+1 ∂d ∂d−1 ∂k+1 ∂k ∂k−1 ∂2 ∂1 ∂0
∂d+1 ∂d ∂d−1 ∂k+1 ∂k ∂k−1 ∂2 ∂1 ∂0
f1 f1 f1 f1 f1f1
f2 f2 f2 f2 f2f2
f3 f3 f3 f3 f3 f3
fm−1 fm−1 fm−1 fm−1 fm−1 fm−1
Figure 6. Persistence complex of the ﬁltration K0⊆K1⊆···⊆ Km.
Henceforth we let Kj = VR(X,εj), j = 0, 1,...,m , be the Vietoris–Rips complex of our point
cloud data at scalesε0<ε 1<··· <ε m. An important fact to note is that persistence barcodes may
be computed without having to compute homology at every scale εj, or, equivalently, at every time
j. To identify the homology classes in Hk(Kj) that persist from time j to time j +p, there is no
need to compute Hk(Kj+1),...,H k(Kj+p) individually as one might think. Rather, one considers
12 G. NAITZAT, A. ZHITNIKOV, AND L.-H. LIM
the p-persistentkth homology group
Hj,p
k =Zj
k/(Bj+p
k ∩Zj
k),
where p = 1, 2...,m −j. This captures the cycles in Ck(Kj) that contribute to homology in
Ck(Kj+p). One may consistently choose a basis for each Hj,p
k so that the basis elements are
compatible for homologies across Hk(Kj+1),...,H k(Kj+p) for all possible values of k and p. This
allows one to track the persistence of each homology class throughout the ﬁltration (3.7) and thus
obtain the persistence barcodes: roughly speaking, with the right basis, we may simultaneously
represent the boundary maps on Ck(Kj) as matrices in an column-echelon form and read-oﬀ the
dimension of Hj,p
k , known as the p-persistentkth Betti number βj,p
k , from the pivot entries in these
matrices. For details we refer readers to [15, 57].
3.6. Homology computations in practice. Actual computation of homology from a point cloud
data set is more involved than what one might surmise from the description in the last few sections.
We will brieﬂy discuss some of the issues involved.
Before we even begin to compute the homology of the point cloud dataX⊆M⊆ Rd, we will need
to perform a few preprocessing steps, as depicted in Figure 7. These steps are standard practice
in topological data analysis: (i) We smooth out X and discard outliers to reduce noise. (ii) We
then select the scaleε and constructing the corresponding Vietoris–Rips complex VRε(X). (iii) We
simplify VRε(X) in a way that reduces its size but leaving its topology unchanged. All processing
operations that can have an eﬀect on the homology are in steps (i) and (ii), and the homology of
the simplicial complex VRε(X) is assumed to closely approximate that of the underlying manifold
M. The simpliﬁcation in step (iii) is done to accelerate computations without altering homology.
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
••
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
Smoothing kernel,
distance etc…
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•
•••
•
•
•
Distance, complex type,
scale ε ∈ (0, ∞)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
2021
22
23
24
25
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
2021
22
23
24
25
Simplex reduction
algorithm / heuristics,
etc…
2
3
4
5
7
8
9
10
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
22
23
24
25
2
3
4
5
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
22
23
24
25
Noise
reduction
Construction of
simplicial comp.
at scale ε
Simplicial comp.
simplicifaction
Homology
computation
(i) (ii) (iii)
Figure 7. Pipeline for computation of homology from a point cloud data.
Note that the size of the ﬁnal simplicial complex on which we perform homology calculations is
the most important factor in computational cost. While increasing the number of points sampled
from a manifold, i.e., the size of X, up to the point in Proposition 3.1 improves the accuracy of our
homology estimates, it also results in a simplicial complex VR ε(X) that is prohibitively large for
carrying out computations, as we saw in (3.5). But since we are not concerned with the geometry of
the underlaying manifold, only its topology, it is desirable to construct a small simplicial complex
with minimal topology distortion. A well-known simpliﬁcation is the Witness complex [12], which
gives results of nearly the same quality with a simplicial complex of a smaller size constructed from
so-called landmark points. Many other methods have been proposed for this [4, 14, 37], and while
we will take advantage of these techniques in our calculations, we will not discuss them here.
The takeaway is that persistence barcodes are considerably more expensive to compute than
homology at a single ﬁxed scale ε. Therefore, running full persistent homology in the context
of modern deep neural network poses some big challenges: modern deep neural networks operate
on very high dimensional big data sets, a setting in which persistent homology cannot be used
TOPOLOGY OF DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS 13
directly due to computation and memory complexity. This situation is exacerbated by the fact
that neural networks are randomly trained (with potentially big variation in the learned decision
boundaries), therefore one needs to run many computations to obtain reliable results. Furthermore,
an automated statistical analysis of persistent homology is still an active area of research and often
requires additional large computational eﬀort. It seems therefore largely beyond the reach of current
technology to try to analyze topology of many of the standard deep learning data sets (such asSVHN,
CIFAR-10, ImageNet, see [41, 26, 13]). We will return to this point later when we introduce our
methodology for monitoring topology transformations in a neural network. In particular, we will
see in Section 5.3 that our experiments are designed in such a way that although we will compute
homology at every layer, we only need to compute persistence barcodes once, before the data set
is passed through the layers.
4. Overview of problem and methodology
We will use binary classiﬁcation, the most basic and fundamental problem in supervised learning,
as our platform for studying how neural networks change topology. More precisely, we seek to
classify two diﬀerent probability distributions supported on two disjoint manifolds Ma, Mb⊆ Rd.
The distance inf{∥x−y∥ :x∈Ma, y∈Mb} can be arbitrarily small but not zero. So there exists
an ideal classiﬁer with zero prediction error. Here and henceforth, ∥·∥ will denote the Euclidean
norm in Rd.
We sample a large but ﬁnite set of points T⊆Ma∪Mb uniformly and densely, so that the Betti
numbers ofMa andMb can be faithfully obtained from the point cloud data setsT∩Ma andT∩Mb
as described in Section 3. Our training set is a labeled point cloud data set, i.e., x∈T is labeled
to indicate whether x∈ Ma or Mb. We will use Ta := T∩Ma and Tb := T∩Mb, or rather, their
Vietoris–Rips complex as described in Section 3.4, as ﬁnite proxies for Ma and Mb.
Our feedforward neural network ν : Rd→ [0, 1] is given by the usual composition
ν =s◦fl◦fl−1◦··· ◦f2◦f1, (4.1)
where each layer of the network fj : Rnj→ Rnj+1,j = 1,...,l , is the composition of an aﬃne map
ρj : Rnj→ Rnj+1,x↦→Ajx+bj, with an activation functionσ : Rnj+1→ Rnj+1; ands : Rnl→ [0, 1]
is the score function. The width nj is the number of nodes in the jth layer and we set n1 =d and
nl =p. For j = 1,...,l , the composition of the ﬁrst through jth layers is denoted
νj :=fj◦··· ◦f2◦f1 and ν =s◦νl.
We assume that s is a linear classiﬁer and thus the decision boundary of s is a hyperplane in Rp.
For notational convenience later, we deﬁne the ‘( l + 1)th layer’ νl+1 := s to be the score function
and the ‘0th layer’ ν0 to be the identity function on Rd.
We train an l-layer neural network ν : Rd→ [0, 1] on a training set T ⊆ Ma∪Mb to classify
samples into class a or b. As usual, the network’s output for a sample x∈ T is interpreted to be
the probability of x∈Ma. In all our experiments, we train ν until it correctly classiﬁes all x∈T
— we will call such a network ν well-trained. In fact, we sampled T so densely that in reality ν
also has near zero misclassiﬁcation error on any test set S⊆ (Ma∪Mb)\T ; and we trained ν so
thoroughly that its output is concentrated near 0 and 1. For all intents and purposes, we may treat
ν as an ideal classiﬁer.
We deliberately choose Ma∪Mb to have doubly complicated topologies in the following sense:
(i) For each i = a,b , the component Mi itself will have complicated topologies, with multiple
components, i.e., large β0(Mi), as well as multiple k-dimensional holes, i.e., large βk(Mi).
(ii) In addition, Ma andMb will be entangled in a topologically complicated manner. See Figures 8
and 9 for example. They not only cannot be separated by a hyperplane but any decision
boundary D⊆ Rd that separates them will necessarily have complicated topology itself.
14 G. NAITZAT, A. ZHITNIKOV, AND L.-H. LIM
In terms of the topological complexity in (2.1), ω(Ma), ω(Mb), ω(D) are all large.
Our experiments are intended to show the topologies ofνj(Ma) andνj(Mb) evolve asj runs from 1
throughl, for diﬀerent manifoldsMa,Mb entangled in diﬀerent ways, for diﬀerent number of layersl
and choices of widthsn1,...,n d, and diﬀerent activationsσ. Getting ahead of ourselves, the results
will show that a well-trained neural network ν : Rd→ [0, 1] reduces the topological complexity of
Ma andMb on a layer-by-layer basis until, at the output, we see a simple disentangled arrangement
where the point cloudT gets mapped into two clusters of pointsν(Ta) andν(Tb) on opposite ends of
[0, 1]. This indicates that an initial decision boundary D⊆ Rd of complicated topology ultimately
gets transformed into a hyperplane in Rp by the time it reaches the ﬁnal layer. We measure and
track the topologies of νj(Ma) and νj(Mb) directly, but our approach only permits us to indirectly
observe the topology of the decision boundary separating them.
4.1. Real versus simulated data. We perform our experiments on a range of both real-world
and simulated data sets to validate our premise that a neural network operates by simplifying
topology. We explain why each is indispensable to our goal.
Unlike real-world data, simulated data may be generated in a controlled manner with well-deﬁned
topological features that are known in advance (crucial for ﬁnding a single scale for all homology
computations). Moreover, with simulated data we have clean samples and may skip the denoising
step mentioned in the previous section. We can generate samples that are uniformly distributed on
the underlaying manifold, and ensure that the assumptions of Section 4 are satisﬁed. In addition,
we may always simulate a data set with a perfect classiﬁer, whereas such a classiﬁer for a real-
wold data set may not exist when the probability distributions of diﬀerent categories overlap. For
convincing results, we train our neural network to perfect accuracy on training set and near-zero
generalization error — this may be impossible for real-world data. Evidently if there is no complete
separation of one category Ma from the other Mb, i.e., Ma∩Mb̸= ∅, the manifold M =Ma∪Mb
will be impossible to disentangle. Such is often the case with real-world data sets, which means
that they may not ﬁt our required setup in Section 4.
Nevertheless, the biggest issue with real-world data sets is that they havevastly more complicated
topologies that are nearly impossible to determine in advance. Even something as basic as the
Mumford data set [29], a mere collection of 3× 3-pixels of high contrast patches of natural images,
took many years to have its topology determined [8] and whether the conclusion (that it has the
topology type of a Klein bottle) is correct is still a matter of debate. Figuring out, say, the topology
of the manifold of cat images within the space of all possible images is well-beyond our capabilities
for the foreseeable future.
Since our experiments on simulated data allow us to pick the right scale to compute homology,
we only need to compute homology at one single scale. On the other hand, for real data we will need
to ﬁnd the persistence barcodes, i.e., determine homology over a full range of scales. Consequently,
our experiments on simulated data are extensive — we repeat our experiments for each simulated
data set over a large number of neural networks of diﬀerent architectures to examine their eﬀects
on topology changes. In all we ran more than 10,000 homology computations on our simulated
data sets since we can do them fast and accurate. In comparison, our experiments on real-world
data are more limited in scope as it is signiﬁcantly more expensive to compute persistence barcodes
then to compute homology at a single scale. As such, we use simulated data to fully explore and
investigate the eﬀects of depth, width, shapes, activation functions, and various combinations of
these factors on the topology-changing power of neural networks. Thereafter we use real-world data
to validate the ﬁndings we draw from the simulated data sets.
5. Methodology
In this section, we will describe the full details of our methodology for (i) simulating topologically
nontrivial data sets in a binary classiﬁcation problem; (ii) training a variety of neural networks to
TOPOLOGY OF DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS 15
near-perfect accuracy for such a problem; (iii) determining the homology of the data set as it passes
through the layers of such a neural network. For real data sets, step (i) is of course irrelevant, but
steps (ii) and (iii) will apply with minor modiﬁcations; these discussions will be deferred to Section 7.
The key underlying reason for designing our experiments in the way we did is relative computa-
tional costs:
• multidimensional persistent homology is much more costly than persistent homology;
• persistent homology is much more costly than homology;
• homology is much more costly than training neural networks.
As such, we train tens of thousands of neural networks to near zero generalization error; for each
neural network, we compute homology at every layer but we compute persistent homology only
once; and we avoid multidimensional persistent homology altogether.
5.1. Generating data sets. We generate three point cloud data sets D-I, D-II, D-III in a con-
trolled manner to have complicated but manageable topologies that we know in advance .
Figure 8. The manifolds underlying data sets D-I, D-II, D-III ( left to right ). The green
Ma represents category a, the red Mb represents category b.
Figure 9. Left: D-II comprises nine pairs of such interlocking rings. Right: D-III com-
prises nine units of such doubly concentric spheres.
D-I is sampled from a two-dimensional manifold consisting of Ma, nine green disks, positioned
in Mb, a larger disk with nine holes as on the left in Figure 8. We clearly have β(Ma) = (9, 0) and
β(Mb) = (1, 9) (one connected component, nine holes). D-II is sampled from a three-dimensional
manifold comprising nine disjoint pairs of red solid torus interlocked with a green solid torus (a
single pair is shown in Figure 9). Ma (resp. Mb) is the union of all nine green (resp. red) tori. So
β(Ma) = β(Mb) = (9, 9, 0). D-III is sampled from a three-dimensional manifold comprising nine
disjoint units of the following — a large red sphere enclosing a smaller green sphere enclosing a red
ball; the green sphere is trapped between the red sphere and the red ball.Ma is the union of all nine
16 G. NAITZAT, A. ZHITNIKOV, AND L.-H. LIM
green spheres and Mb is the union of the nine spheres and nine balls. So we have β(Ma) = (9, 0, 9)
and =β(Mb) = (18, 0, 9) (see Figures 8 and 9 for more details, but note on Figure 9 the spheres are
shown with portions omitted). In all cases, the two categories a andb are entangled in such a way
that any decision boundary separating the two categories necessarily has highly complex topology.
The point cloud data sets D-I and D-III are sampled on a grid whereas D-II is sampled uniformly
from the solid tori. The diﬀerence in sampling schemes is inconsequential for all intents and purposes
in this article, as the samples are suﬃciently dense that there is no diﬀerence in training and testing
behaviors.
5.2. Training neural networks. Our goal is to examine the topology changing eﬀects of (i) dif-
ferent activations: hyperbolic tangent, leaky ReLU set to be max( x, 0.2x), and ReLU; (ii) diﬀerent
depths of four to ten layers; (iii) diﬀerent widths of six to ﬁfty neurons. So for any given data
set (D-I, D-II, D-III) and any given architecture (depth, width, activation), we tracked the Betti
numbers through all layers for at least 30 well-trained neural networks. The repetition is necessary
— given that neural network training involves a fair amount of randomization in initialization,
batching, optimization, etc — to ensure that what we observe is not a ﬂuke.
To train these neural networks to our requirements — recall that this means zero training error
and a near-zero (≈ 0.01%) generalization error — we relied onTensorFlow(version 1.12.0 on Ubuntu
16.04.1). Training is done on cross-entropy categorical loss with standard Adam optimizer [25] for
up to 18,000 training epochs. Learning rate is set to 0 .02–0.04 with an exponential decay, i.e., ηt/d
wheret is the training epoch normalized by d = 2500. For the ‘bottleneck architectures’ where the
widths narrow down in the middle layers (see Table 1), the decay is set to 4000 and η = 0.5. We
use the softmax function as the score function in all of our networks, i.e., s : Rp→ Rp whose ith
coordinate is
si(x) =exi/(ex1 +··· +exp), i = 1,...,p,
where p is the number of categories. In our case, p = 2 and i =a,b .
Table 1 summarizes our results: the data set used, the activation type, the widths of each layer,
and the number of successfully trained neural networks of that architecture obtained. The ﬁrst
number in the sequence of the third column gives the dimension of the input, which is two for
the two-dimensional D-I and three for the three-dimensional D-II and D-III. The last number in
that sequence is always two since they are all binary classiﬁcation problems. To give readers an
idea, training any one of these neural networks to near zero generalization error takes at most 10
minutes, often much less.
5.3. Computing homology. For each of the neural networks obtained in Section 5.2, we track
how the topology of the respective point cloud data set changes as it passed through the layers.
This represents the bulk of the computational eﬀort, way beyond that required for training neural
networks in Section 5.2. With simulated data, we are essentially assured of a perfectly clean data
set and the preprocessing step in Figure 7 of Section 3.6 may be omitted. We describe the rest of
the work involved below.
The metric δ used to form our Vietoris–Rips complex is given by the graph geodesic distance
on the k-nearest neighbors graph determined by the point cloud X⊆ Rd. As this depends on k,
a positive integer specifying the number of neighbors used in the graph construction, we denote
the metric by δk. In other words, the Euclidean distance on Rd is used only to form the k-nearest
neighbors graph and do not play a role thereafter. For any xi,xj∈ X, the distance δk(xi,xj) is
given by the minimal number of edges between them in the k-nearest neighbors graph. Each edge,
regardless of its Euclidean length, has the same length of one when measured in δk.
The metric δk has the eﬀect of normalizing distances across layers of a neural network while
preserving connectivity of nearest neighbors. This is important for us as the local densities of a
point cloud can vary enormously as it passes through a layer of a well-trained neural network — each
layer stretches and shrinks diﬀerent regions, dramatically altering geometry as one can see in the
TOPOLOGY OF DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS 17
data set activation neurons in each layer #
D-I tanh 2-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-2 30
D-I leaky ReLU 2-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-2 30
D-I leaky ReLU 2-05-05-05-05-03-05-05-05-05-05-2 30
D-I leaky ReLU 2-15-15-15-15-03-15-15-15-15-2 30
D-I leaky ReLU 2-50-50-50-50-50-50-50-50-50-50-2 30
D-I ReLU 2-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-2 30
D-II tanh 3-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-2 32
D-II leaky ReLU 3-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-2 36
D-II ReLU 3-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-2 31
D-II tanh 3-25-25-25-25-25-25-25-25-25-25-2 30
D-II leaky ReLU 3-25-25-25-25-25-25-25-25-25-25-2 30
D-II ReLU 3-25-25-25-25-25-25-25-25-25-25-2 30
D-III tanh 3-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-2 30
D-III leaky ReLU 3-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-2 46
D-III ReLU 3-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-2 30
D-III tanh 3-50-50-50-50-50-50-50-50-50-50-2 30
D-III leaky ReLU 3-50-50-50-50-50-50-50-50-50-50-2 30
D-III ReLU 3-50-50-50-50-50-50-50-50-50-50-2 34
D-I tanh 2-15-15-15-15-2 30
D-I tanh 2-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-2 30
D-I leaky ReLU 2-15-15-15-15-2 30
D-I leaky ReLU 2-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-2 30
D-I ReLU 2-15-15-15-15-2 30
D-I ReLU 2-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-2 30
D-II tanh 3-15-15-15-15-2 31
D-II tanh 3-15-15-15-15-15-2 31
D-II tanh 3-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-2 30
D-II leaky ReLU 3-15-15-15-15-2 31
D-II leaky ReLU 3-15-15-15-15-15-2 30
D-II leaky ReLU 3-15-15-15-15-15-15-2 30
D-II leaky ReLU 3-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-2 31
D-II leaky ReLU 3-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-2 42
D-II ReLU 3-15-15-15-15-2 32
D-II ReLU 3-15-15-15-15-15-2 32
D-II ReLU 3-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-2 31
D-III tanh 3-15-15-15-15-15-15-2 30
D-III tanh 3-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-2 31
D-III leaky ReLU 3-15-15-15-15-15-15-2 30
D-III leaky ReLU 3-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-2 30
D-III ReLU 3-15-15-15-15-15-15-2 33
D-III ReLU 3-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-15-2 32
Table 1. First column speciﬁes the data set on which we train the networks. Next two
columns give the activation used and a sequence giving the number of neurons in each layer.
Last column gives the number of well-trained networks obtained.
bottom halves of Figures 11, 12, and 13. Using an intrinsic metric like δk ameliorates this variation
in densities; it is robust to geometric changes and yet reveals topological ones. Furthermore, our
choice of δk allows for comparison across layers with diﬀerent numbers of neurons. Note that if
d̸=p, the Euclidean norms on Rd and Rp are two diﬀerent metrics on two diﬀerent spaces with no
basis for comparison. Had we used Euclidean norms, two Vietoris–Rips complexes of the same scale
ε in two diﬀerent layers cannot be directly compared — the scale needs to be calibrated somehow
to reﬂect that they live in diﬀerent spaces. Using δk avoids this problem.
This leaves us with two parameters to set: k, the number of neighbors in the nearest neighbors
graph and ε, the scale at which to build our Vietoris–Rips complex. This is where persistent
homology, described at length in Section 3.5, comes into play. Informed readers may think that we
should be using multidimensional persistence since there are two parameters but this is prohibitively
expensive as the problem is EXPSPACE-complete [9] and its results are not quite what we need, for
18 G. NAITZAT, A. ZHITNIKOV, AND L.-H. LIM
one, there is no multidimensional analogue of persistence barcodes [10]. To choose an appropriate
(k∗,ε∗) for a point cloud X⊆M⊆ Rd, we construct a ﬁltered complex over the two parameters:
Let VRk,ε(X) be the Vietoris–Rips complex of X with respect to the metric δk at scale ε. In
our case, we know the topology of the underlying manifold M completely as we generated it in
Section 5.1 as part of our data sets. Thus we may ascertain whether our chosen value ( k∗,ε∗) gives
a Vietoris–Rips complex VRk∗,ε∗(X) with the same homology as M.
Set ε = 1, we determine a value of k∗ with persistent homology on the k-ﬁltered complex in the
metric δk with correct zeroth homology, i.e., k∗ is chosen so that
β0
(
VRk∗,1(X)
)
=β0(M).
Set k = k∗, we determine a value of ε∗ with persistent homology on the ε-ﬁltered complex in the
metric δk∗ with correct ﬁrst and second homologies, i.e., ε∗ is chosen so that
β1
(
VRk∗,ε∗(X)
)
=β1(M) and β2
(
VRk∗,ε∗(X)
)
=β2(M).
If there is a range of parameters that all recover the correct homology we pick our ( k∗,ε∗) closest
to the middle of the range. Once these parameters are set, we keep them ﬁxed for our homology
computations across all layers of the network.
The parameters chosen via the aforementioned procedure for our data sets are as follows. For D-I,
we havek∗ = 14 neighbors, and scale is set atε∗ = 2.5; recall that this means thatx0,x 1,...,x n∈X
form an n-simplex in VR 14,2.5(X) whenever δ14(xi,xj)≤ 2.5 for all i,j . For both D-II and D-III,
we have k∗ = 35 and ε∗ = 2.5. Figure 10 shows the Betti numbers for these three data sets over
a range of values of ( k,ε ): green (resp. red) dots indicate integral points on the ( k,ε )-plane with
correct (resp. incorrect) Betti numbers and the blue dot marks the ( k∗,ε∗) selected in each case.
Our homology and persistent homology computations are all performed using the Eirene package
in Julia 0.6.4 [22]. To give readers an idea, the time required to compute a single Betti number from
a point cloud X ranges from a few tens of seconds, if X⊆ R5 is the output of a ﬁve-neuron-wide
layer, to at most 30 minutes, if X⊆ R50 is the output of a 50-neuron wide layer. On the other
hand, the time taken for the persistent homology computations to obtain k∗ and ε∗ is in excess
of 80 minutes. These computations are run in parallel over 12 cores of an Intel i7-8750H-2.20GHz
processor with 9,216KB cache and 32GB DDR4-2666MHz RAM. The jobs are fed in a queue, with
a single core limited to 9GB of memory.
5.4. Overview of our experiments. All our experiments on simulated data (those on real data
omits the ﬁrst step) may be described at a high level as follows: (i) generate a manifold M =
Ma∪Mb⊆ Rd with Ma∩Mb = ∅; (ii) densely sample point cloud X⊆M and let Xi :=X∩Mi,
i =a,b ; (iii) trainl-layer neural networkν : Rd→ [0, 1] on the labeled training setXa∪Xb to classify
points on M; (iv) compute homology of the output at the jth layerνj(Xi),j = 0, 1,...,l,l + 1 and
i =a,b . This allows us to track how the topology of Mi, by way of (persistent) homology of Xi, as
it passes through the layers. Steps (i) and (ii) are described in Section 5.1, step (iii) in Section 5.2,
and step (iv) in Section 5.3. The neural network notations are as in Section 4. Results will be
described in Section 6.
In reality, the point cloud Xi used in step (iv) is not the same as the training set Xi used in
step (iii) as it is considerably more expensive to compute homology (see Section 5.3) than to train
a neural network to near zero generalization error (see Section 5.2). As such the size of point
clouds used for our homology computations are a fraction (about 1/4) that used to train our neural
networks.
data set training neural networks homology computations
D-I 7,800 2,600
D-II 45,000 11,250
D-III 37,800 9,450
Table 2. Comparison of sample sizes for computations in Sections 5.2 and 5.3.
TOPOLOGY OF DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS 19
Figure 10. For each combination of parameters k and ε, we determine whether the ho-
mology of VR k,ε(X) matches the homology of the manifold M from which X is sampled.
We marked those values of (k,ε ) with correct homology in green and those with incorrect
homology in red. Our choice of ( k,ε ), naturally chosen among the correct ones, is marked
in blue.
20 G. NAITZAT, A. ZHITNIKOV, AND L.-H. LIM
6. Results and discussions
We present the results from our experiments to analyze how a well-trained neural network sim-
pliﬁes the topology of a data set. More importantly, we discuss what one may surmise from these
results. We start with the three simulated data sets D-I, D-II, D-III in Section 5.1 since the results
are the most striking in this case. To validate that these observations indeed extend to real data,
we repeat our experiments on four real-world data sets in Section 7.
input 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 output
Layer1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
D-I
Tanh
input 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 output
Layer1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
D-I
LeakyRelu
input 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 output
Layer1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
D-I
Relu
Figure 11. Top: Faint curves show individual proﬁles, dark curves show averaged proﬁles
ofβ0
(
νk(Ma)
)
,k = 1,..., 10, in data set D-I. Shaded region is the region of± half standard
deviation about average curve. Networks have diﬀerent activations — blue for tanh, red
for leaky ReLU, green for ReLU; but same architecture — ten layers, two neurons in the
ﬁrst and the last layers, ﬁfteen in the intervening layers. Bottom: Projections of νk(Ma),
k = 1,..., 10, on the ﬁrst two principal components, color-coded according to activations.
6.1. Topological simpliﬁcation evident across training instances. Figure 11 records our
simplest data set D-I, where Ma comprises nine contractible components and so higher Betti num-
bers are irrelevant (all zero). Here we present every curve corresponding to every neural network
trained on D-I, recall that we do at least 30 runs for each experiment to account for the inherent
randomness, and they all show consistent proﬁles — a clear decay in β0 across the layers although
hyperbolic tangent activation (blue graph) shows larger variance in this decay than leaky ReLU
(red graph) and ReLU (green graph). The proﬁles shown in Figure 11 are representative of other
experiments on higher Betti numbers and on other data sets. To avoid clutter, in the corresponding
ﬁgures for D-II and D-III (Figures 12 and 13), we omit curves corresponding to the individual runs
and show only the curve of their means (dark curve in middle) and the region of half standard
deviation (shaded region). The bottom diagrams in Figure 11 show how Ma changes from layer-
to-layer by projecting onto its ﬁrst two principal components (note that the intervening layers are
in R15).
6.2. Nonhomeomorphic activations induce rapid topology changes. As the faint blue lines
in Figure 11 reveal, hyperbolic tangent activation is less eﬀective at reducing Betti numbers, oc-
casionally even increasing them over layers. In all data sets, across all our experiments, the non-
homeomorphic activation ReLU exhibits the most rapid reductions in all Betti numbers. The top
TOPOLOGY OF DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS 21
input 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 output
Layer1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
D-II
0 ± 1
2
Tanh
LeakyRelu
Relu
input 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 output
Layer0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
1 
D-II
1 ± 1
2
Tanh
LeakyRelu
Relu
Figure 12. Top: Proﬁles of β0
(
νk(Ma)
)
and β1
(
νk(Ma)
)
for data set D-II, k = 1,..., 10.
Network’s architecture: three-dimensional input, two-dimensional output, and ﬁfteen neu-
rons in intervening layers one to nine, with diﬀerent activations. Bottom: Projections of
νk(Ma), k = 1,..., 10, on the ﬁrst two principal components.
halves of Figures 11, 12 and 13 show results for a 10-layer network (see caption for speciﬁcs). The
diﬀerent rates at which topological changes occur are also evident from the principal components
projections in the bottom half of these ﬁgures.
6.3. Eﬀorts depend on topological features. Some topological features evidently require more
layers to simplify than others. The hardest one is the interlocking tori in the data set D-II. The
proﬁle of β1
(
νl(Ma)
)
in the graph on the right of Figure 12 shows that some loops survive across
many layers, especially so when activated with hyperbolic tangent (blue): both the (blue) principal
components projections and the (blue) proﬁle show that the loops persist considerably longer than
any other features in any of the three data sets.
6.4. Eﬀects of width on topology change. For the data set D-I, we compare three sets of
ten-layer networks: (i) narrow networks with six neurons in each layer; (ii) ‘bottleneck’ networks
with 15, 15, 15, 15, 3, 15, 15, 15, 15 neurons respectively in layers one through nine — notice
the three neuron bottleneck layer; (iii) wide networks with ﬁfty neurons in each layer. The left
graph in Figure 14 suggests that a bottleneck layer forces large topological changes, and a narrow
network changes topology faster than a wider one. The other two graphs compare a 15-neuron wide
network with a 50-neuron wide one, both with ten layers, on data sets D-II and D-III respectively.
However, for the same choice of activation, the diﬀerence between them is negligible. Also, reducing
the width below ﬁfteen neurons makes training to high accuracy increasing more diﬃcult, i.e., the
percentage of successfully trained networks starts to drop.
6.5. Eﬀects of depth on topology change. Reducing the depth of a constant-width network
beyond a certain threshold makes it increasingly diﬃcult to train the network to high accuracy —
22 G. NAITZAT, A. ZHITNIKOV, AND L.-H. LIM
input 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 output
Layer1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
D-III
0 ± 1
2
Tanh
LeakyRelu
Relu
input 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 output
Layer0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
2
D-III
2 ± 1
2
Tanh
LeakyRelu
Relu
Figure 13. Top: Proﬁles of β0
(
νk(Ma)
)
andβ2
(
νk(Ma)
)
for data set D-III, k = 1,..., 10.
Network’s architecture: three-dimensional input, two-dimensional output, and ﬁfteen neu-
rons in intervening layers one to nine, with diﬀerent activations. Bottom: Projections of
νk(Ma), k = 1,..., 10, on ﬁrst two principal components.
input 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9/o 10/o
Layer1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
D-I
Width - 5, LeakyRelu
Bottleneck, LeakyRelu
Width - 50, LeakyRelu
input 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 output
Layer1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
0 + 1
D-II
Width - 15, Tanh
Width - 50, Tanh
Width - 15, LeakyRelu
Width - 50, LeakyRelu
Width - 15, Relu
Width - 50, Relu
input 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 output
Layer1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
0 + 2
D-III
Width - 15, Tanh
Width - 50, Tanh
Width - 15, LeakyRelu
Width - 50, LeakyRelu
Width - 15, Relu
Width - 50, Relu
Figure 14. Mean values of topological complexity ω
(
νk(Ma)
)
, k = 1,...,l , for ten-layer
deep networks of varying widths. Error bars indicate ± half standard deviation about the
mean.
the percentage of successfully trained networks drops noticeably. Moreover, as the depth is reduced,
the burden of changing topology does not spread evenly across all layers but becomes concentrated
in the ﬁnal layers. The initial layers do not appear to play a big role in changing topology, reducing
depth simply makes the ﬁnal layers ‘work harder’ to produce larger reductions in Betti numbers.
Figure 15 shows this eﬀect.
TOPOLOGY OF DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS 23
input 1 2 3 4/o 5 6 7 8/o 9 o
Layer1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
D-I
4 - Layers, Tanh
8 - Layers, Tanh
10 - Layers, Tanh
input 1 2 3 4/o 5 6 7 8/o 9 o
Layer1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
D-I
4 - Layers, LeakyRelu
8 - Layers, LeakyRelu
10 - Layers, LeakyRelu
input 1 2 3 4/o 5 6 7 8/o 9 o
Layer1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
D-I
4 - Layers, Relu
8 - Layers, Relu
10 - Layers, Relu
input 1 2 3 4/o 5/o 6 7/o 8 9 o
Layer1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
0 + 1
D-II
4 - Layers, Tanh
5 - Layers, Tanh
7 - Layers, Tanh
10 - Layers, Tanh
input 1 2 3 4/o 5/o 6/o 7/o 8/o 9 o
Layer1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
D-II
4 - layers, LeakyRelu
5 - layers, LeakyRelu
6 - layers, LeakyRelu
7 - layers, LeakyRelu
8 - layers, LeakyRelu
10 - layers, LeakyRelu
input 1 2 3 4/o 5 6 7/o 8 9 o
Layer
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
D-II
4 - layers, Relu
5 - layers, Relu
8 - layers, Relu
10 - layers, Relu
input 1 2 3 4 5 6/o 7 8/o 9 o
Layer1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
0 + 2
D-III
6 - Layers, Tanh
8 - Layers, Tanh
10 - Layers, Tanh
input 1 2 3 4 5 6/o 7 8/o 9 o
Layer1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
D-III
6 - Layers, LeakyRelu
8 - Layers, LeakyRelu
10 - Layers, LeakyRelu
input 1 2 3 4 5 6/o 7 8/o 9 o
Layer1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
D-III
6 - Layers, Relu
8 - Layers, Relu
10 - Layers, Relu
Figure 15. Mean values of topological complexity ω
(
νk(Ma)
)
, k = 1,...,l , for ﬁfteen-
neuron-wide networks of varying depths. Error bars indicate ± half standard deviation
about the mean.
7. Consistency with real-world data
The results in Section 6 are deduced from experiments on the simulated data sets D-I, D-II,
D-III generated in Section 5.1. It is naturally to ask if these results remain valid on real data. In
this section, we will see that they are, with some mild caveats. The key diﬀerence between real and
simulated data is only in the amount of computational eﬀort required to carry out our experiments
— they are much more expensive for real data sets.
We will validate our results on four real-world data sets from (i) MNIST Handwritten Digits
[28], (ii) HTRU2 High Time-Resolution Universe Survey [33], (iii) UCI Banknotes Authentication
[32], (iv) UCI Sensorless Drive Diagnostic [2]. These data sets were chosen on the basis that they
are real-valued and may be trained to high accuracy. The goal, as usual, is to observe how their
topology changes as they pass through the layers of well-trained neural networks. To this end, our
methodology in Section 5 applies to these data sets with some modiﬁcations:
• For real data, it is no longer possible to obtain the kind of near-perfectly trained neural
networks in Section 5.2 that we could readily obtain with simulated data. As such, we
adjust our expectations accordingly. By a well-trained neural network on a real data set,
we mean one whose test accuracy ranges between 95 to 98 percent (recall that for simulated
data, we required 99.99% or better).
• Unlike the simulated data sets in Section 5.1, we do not already know the topology of our
real data sets and this has to be determined with persistent homology. More importantly, for
24 G. NAITZAT, A. ZHITNIKOV, AND L.-H. LIM
real data, it is no longer possible to set a single scale for observing topological changes across
diﬀerent layers, as described in Section 5.3 — we have to compute persistent homology in
every layer to track topological changes.
The complexity of real-world data and the need to calculate full persistent homology at every
layer limits the number of experiments that we could run. As it will be prohibitively expensive to
carry out extensive exploratory tests across a range of diﬀerent architectures like what we did on
simulated data (see Table 1), we will keep both width (10 neurons) and depth (10 layers) ﬁxed in
this section. In any case, our experiments on real data sets are not intended to be exploratory but
to corroborate the ﬁndings in Section 6 that we deduced from simulated data. We seek conﬁrmation
on two ﬁndings in particular: the reduction in topological complexity through the layers and the
relative eﬀectiveness of ReLU over tanh activations in achieving this. Note that while we will only
present the persistence barcodes at the output of ﬁrst, the middle, and the ﬁnal layer, we computed
persistence homology in every layer; interested readers may easily get those for other layers from
our publicly available codes.
7.1. MNIST Handwritten Digits [28]. Each of the 70,000 images in the MNIST handwritten
digits data set is an image of size 28 × 28-pixels and collectively forms a point cloud on some
manifold M ⊆ R784. Computing persistent homology for a 784-dimensional point cloud is way
beyond what our computing resource could handle and we ﬁrst reduce dimension by projecting
onto its leading 50 principal components. Nevertheless, the dimension-reduced images remain to
be of reasonably high-quality; we show a comparison of a few original digits alongside their principal
component projections onto R50 in Figure 16. We will take the dimension-reduced point cloud X
as the starting point for our experiments and will loosely refer to X⊆ M⊆ R50 as the MNIST
data set.
Figure 16. Left: Original MNIST handwritten digits. Right: MNIST handwritten digits
projected onto ﬁrst ﬁfty principal components.
Since we would like to have a binary classiﬁcation problem for consistency with all our other
experiments, instead of regarding the MNIST data as a classiﬁcation problem with ten classes, we
reduce it to a problem of classifying a chosen (any) digit a versus all non-a digits. So our manifold
isM =Ma∪Mb, whereMa is the ‘manifold all handwrittena’ andMb is the union of the ‘manifolds
of all other non-a handwritten digits.’ Following our methodology in Section 5, we train a neural
network with ten layers and ten neuron in each layer on a labelled point cloud Xa = X∩Ma
and Xb = X∩Mb to classify points in Ma and Mb; then with persistent homology we analyze
how Ma is transformed after each layer in the network. While we ﬁx the depth and widths, we
vary the activation among tanh, leaky ReLU, and ReLU. We used 60,000 samples to train and
the remaining 10,000 samples to test our neural networks; we use one third of the test set for our
persistent homology calculations.
TOPOLOGY OF DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS 25
activation scale ε k = 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
tanh
1.5 525 408 356 266 233 145 156 88 30 20 9
2.5 6 5 2 1 3 14 12 8 1 4 4
3.5 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 3
leaky
ReLU
1.5 525 340 182 108 38 16 10 8 1 1 1
2.5 6 6 6 5 1 1 2 1 1 1 1
3.5 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
ReLU
1.5 525 199 106 27 13 6 1 1 1 1 1
2.5 6 2 6 6 2 1 1 1 1 1 1
3.5 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
Table 3. Topological complexity ω(Ma) = β0
(
νk(Ma)
)
+β1
(
νk(Ma)
)
+β2
(
νk(Ma)
)
at
layersk = 0, 1,..., 10 withMa the ‘manifold of handwrittena’. Network has 50-dimensional
input, 2-dimensional output, and is 10-dimensional in intermediate layers. For each of three
activation types, we show homology at three scales ε = 1.5, 2.5, 3.5.
The results of our experiments for the digit a = 0 are shown in Table 3. What we see in the
table corroborates our earlier ﬁndings on simulated data sets — an unmistakable reduction in
topological complexity through the layers, with ReLU activation reducing topological complexity
most rapidly when compared to the other two activations. With tanh activation, reduction in
topological complexity is not only much slower but the network fails to reduce Ma to a topological
disk, despite having ten layers. The persistence barcodes diagram for the MNIST data set is much
larger than those for the next three data sets but it is not much more informative than our summary
statistics in Table 3. As such we do not show it here although it can just as readily be generated
from our program.
7.2. HTRU2 High Time Resolution Universe Survey[33]. This data set consists of statistics
of radio source signals from 17,898 stars, measured during the High Time Resolution Universe
Survey (HTRU2) experiment to identify pulsars. For our purpose, it suﬃces to know that pulsars
are stars that produce radio emission measurable on earth. In the HTRU2 data set, each recorded
radio emission is described by eight continuous variable: four are statistics of the radio signal called
‘integrated proﬁle’ and the other four are statistics of the ‘DM-SNR curve’ that tracks frequency
components of the signal versus its arrival time. The radio sources are labeled by a or b according
to whether the source is a pulsar or not. We show a small portion of this data set in Table 4.
Star # 1 2 3 4 5
Mean (integral proﬁle) 140.5625 102.5078 103.0156 136.7500 99.3672
Standard Deviation (integral proﬁle) 55.6838 45.5499 39.3416 57.1784 41.5722
Excess Kurtosis (integral proﬁle) −0.2346 0.2829 0.3233 −0.0684 0.4653
Skewness (integral proﬁle) −0.6996 0.4199 1.0511 −0.6362 4.1541
Mean (DM-SNR) 3.1998 1.3587 3.1212 3.6423 1.6773
Standard Deviation (DM-SNR) 19.1104 13.0790 21.7447 20.9593 61.7190
Excess Kurtosis (DM-SNR) 7.9755 13.3121 7.7358 6.8965 2.2088
Skewness (DM-SNR) 74.2422 212.5970 63.1720 53.5937 127.3930
Pulsar ‘a’ or not ‘b’ b a b b b
Table 4. Five entries from HTRU2. The ﬁrst eight rows are statistics of the radio signal
from that star. The last row indicates whether the respective star is a pulsar ‘ a’ or not ‘b’.
26 G. NAITZAT, A. ZHITNIKOV, AND L.-H. LIM
Figure 17. Persistence barcode diagrams for neural networks trained on HTRU2 show
topology changes in the ‘pulsar manifold’ Ma as it passes through layers activated with
tanh (top) and ReLU ( bottom). Scatter plots show principal component projections of Ma
(red) and the ‘non-pulsar manifold’ Mb (blue) at the corresponding layers.
TOPOLOGY OF DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS 27
We take a 3,278 subsample of the HTRU2 data set so that we have an equal number of pulsar
and non-pulsars. This is a point cloud X⊆ M⊆ R8 with M = Ma∪Mb a union of the ‘pulsar
manifold’Ma and ‘non-pulsar manifold’ Mb; the point clouds Xa =X∩Ma andXb =X∩Mb each
has 1,639 points. We use 80% of this balanced data X for training the neural networks and the
remaining 20% for testing. For persistent homology computations, we use the test set but we ﬁrst
passed it through a local outlier removal algorithm in [5] for denoising. Again, our neural networks
have ten layers with ten neurons in each layer and are activated with either ReLU or tanh.
In Figure 17, we show the persistence barcode diagrams for νk(Xa) in the ﬁrst, middle, and last
layer, i.e., k = 1, 5, 10. The scatter plots below the barcode diagrams show, for k = 1, 5, 10, the
projections of νk(Xa) (red) and νk(Xb) (blue) onto the three leading principal components. These
persistent barcodes tell the same story for the HTRU2 data as Table 3 does for the MNIST data
and Figures 11, 12, 13 do for the simulated data D-I, D-II, D-III: Topology is simpliﬁed as the
data passes through the layers; and ReLU does a better job than tanh activation at simplifying
topological complexity.
7.3. UCI Banknotes Authentication [32]. This data set is derived from 400 × 400-pixels gray
scale images of 1,372 genuine and forged banknotes; small patches ranging in sizes from 96 × 96 to
128× 128-pixels are extracted from the images and wavelet-transformed. Figure 18 shows three of
these small extracted patches.
Figure 18. Texture sample for genuine banknote (left), high-quality forgery (middle) and
low-quality forgery (right). The ﬁgures are taken from [32].
The UCI Banknotes data set does not contain any images but is simply a list of four statistics
computed from the wavelet coeﬃcients of the image patches, together with a label indicating
whether the patch is from a genuine ‘ a’ or forged ‘ b’ banknote. We show ﬁve of these entries in
Table 5; the full data set comprises 1,372 entries like these.
Banknote # 1 2 3 4 5 6
Variance (wavelet coef.) −1.3971 4.5459 3.8660 3.4566 0.3292 0.3901
Skewness (wavelet coef.) 3.3191 8.1674 −2.6383 9.5228 −4.4552 −0.1428
Kurtosis (wavelet coef.) −1.3927 −2.4586 1.9242 −4.0112 4.5718 −0.0319
Entropy (wavelet coef.) −1.9948 −1.4621 0.1065 −3.5944 −0.9888 0.3508
Genuine ‘a’ or forged ‘b’ a b b b b a
Table 5. Five entries from the UCI Banknotes data set. The ﬁrst four rows are statistics
of the wavelet coeﬃcients of banknotes image patches. The last row indicates whether the
respective banknote is genuine ‘a’ or forged ‘b’.
28 G. NAITZAT, A. ZHITNIKOV, AND L.-H. LIM
Figure 19. Persistence barcode diagrams for neural networks trained on UCI Banknotes
data show topology changes in the ‘manifold of genuine banknotes’ Ma as it passes through
layers activated with tanh ( top) and ReLU ( bottom). Scatter plots show principal com-
ponent projections of Ma (red) and the ‘manifold of forged banknotes’ Mb (blue) at the
corresponding layers.
TOPOLOGY OF DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS 29
As with the HTRU2 data set, we subsample 1,200 entries from the UCI Banknotes data set
so that we have an equal number of genuine and forged samples; we use 80% of this data set for
training and 20% for testing; and for persistent homology computations, we preprocess the data
with the outliers removal algorithm in [5]. For our purpose, the UCI Banknotes data set is a point
cloud X⊆ M⊆ R4 with M = Ma∪Mb a union of the ‘manifold of genuine banknotes’ Ma and
‘manifold of forged banknotes’ Mb; the point clouds Xa =X∩Ma andXb =X∩Mb each has 600
points.
When Xa and Xb are passed through well-trained neural networks (ten layers, ten neurons in
each layer, ReLU or tanh-activated), we obtained results consistent with all earlier experiments.
The persistence barcodes diagrams in Figure 19 show that Betti numbers β1 and β2 are reduced
to zero for both activations, β0 successfully reduces to one when ReLU-activated but is stuck at
two when tanh-activated. Also, reduction of Betti numbers happens more rapidly with ReLU-
activation. These observations are also reﬂected in the respective principal components scatter
plots below each persistence barcodes diagram.
7.4. UCI Sensorless Drive Diagnostic [2]. This data set concerns a printed circuit board that
operates a speciﬁc type of drive motor. The goal is to classify twelve types of common defects in
the drive motor based on 49 measurements of electric currents at various locations on the printed
circuit board. Table 6 shows a sample of ﬁve such entries in this data set, which has a total of
58,509 such entries.
sample # 1 2 3 4 5
Elect. curr. 1 −3.015× 10−7 −2.952× 10−6 −2.952× 10−6 −4.961× 10−6 −6.501× 10−6
Elect. curr. 2 8.260× 10−6 −5.248× 10−6 −3.184× 10−6 −2.088× 10−6 −6.208× 10−6
Elect. curr. 3 −1.152× 10−5 3.342× 10−6 −1.592× 10−5 −1.366× 10−5 4.644× 10−6
Elect. curr. 4 −2.310× 10−6 −6.056× 10−6 −1.208× 10−6 4.661× 10−7 −2.749× 10−6
Elect. curr. 5 −1.439× 10−6 2.779× 10−6 −1.575× 10−6 2.369× 10−6 −4.167× 10−6
Elect. curr. 6 −2.123× 10−5 −3.752× 10−6 1.7394× 10−5 3.785× 10−6 −3.347× 10−5
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
...
Elect. curr. 49 −1.500× 100 −1.501× 100 −1.496× 100 −1.497× 100 −1.500× 100
Failure types a a a b b
Table 6. Five entries from the UCI Drive data set. Last row indicates whether the failure
is of type ‘a’ or one of the other eleven types, all of which are indicated as ‘ b’.
As in the case of the MNIST data set, instead of regarding the UCI Drive data as a classiﬁcation
problem with twelve classes, we reduce it to a binary classiﬁcation problem of classifying a type a
defect versus all other eleven types of defects. So our manifold is M =Ma∪Mb where Ma is the
‘manifold of type a defects’ and Mb is the union of the ‘manifolds of all other types of defects.’ Of
the 58,509 entries in the UCI Drive data, we choose a random subset of 10,600 as our point cloud
X⊆ M⊆ R49. The rest of the experiments is exactly as in the previous two cases (HTRU2 and
UCI Banknotes data). The results are shown in Figure 20 and they are fully consistent with the
results in Figures 17 and 19, supporting the same conclusions we drew from all previously examined
data sets.
30 G. NAITZAT, A. ZHITNIKOV, AND L.-H. LIM
Figure 20. Persistence barcode diagrams for neural networks trained on UCI Drive data
show topology changes in the ‘manifold of type a defects’ Ma as it passes through layers
activated with tanh ( previous page) and ReLU ( above). Scatter plots show principal com-
ponent projections of Ma (red) and the ‘manifolds of all other types of defects’ Mb (blue)
at the corresponding layers.
TOPOLOGY OF DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS 31
8. Concluding discussions
Our ﬁndings support the view that deep neural networks operate by transforming topology,
gradually simplifying topologically complicated data shapes and arrangements in the input space
until it becomes linearly separable in the output space. We proﬀered some new insights on the
roles of the deep layers and of rectiﬁed activations, namely, that they are mechanisms that aid
topological changes. As this article is an empirical study intended to provide evidence for the
above point-of-view, we did not investigate the actual mechanics of how a ReLU-activated neural
network carries out topological changes. We conclude our article with a few speculative words
about the ‘topology changing mechanism’ of neural networks, mainly to serve as pointers for future
work.
Consider the concentric red and blue circles on the left of Figure 21, two one-dimensional mani-
folds embedded in R2. By the Jordan Curve Theorem, there is no homeomorphism R2→ R2 that
will transform the two circles into two sets that can be separated by a hyperplane in R2. Neverthe-
less it is easy to achieve this with a many-to-one map like (x,y )↦→ (|x|,|y|) as shown in the left of
Figure 21 that allows one to ‘fold’ a set. An alternative way to achieve this is with anembedding into
higher dimensional space like in the right Figure 21 where we did R2→ R3→ R3→ R3→ R3→ R2
with operations within R3 that disentangles the red and blue circles. Our speculation is that in
a neural network, (i) the ReLU activation is a many-to-one map that can ‘fold’ a space; (ii) the
excess width 4 of the intermediate layers aﬀords a higher dimensional space in which to transform
the data; (iii) the depth on the other hand plays the role of time, every additional layer aﬀords
additional time to transform the data. To elaborate on the last point (iii), note that since we are
limited to aﬃne transformations and ReLU activation, a substantial change to the topology of a
space may require a longer sequence of these operations, and by ‘time’, we simply mean the length
of this sequence.
x↦→| x|, y↦→| y|.
x↦→ x, y↦→ y,
x↦→ z. z ↦→ max(z, 0)
+ max(−x, 0).
x↦→ x, y↦→ y, x ↦→ y, y↦→ y,
z↦→ z. y ↦→ max(x, 0)
+ max(−x, 0).
x↦→ x, z↦→ z,
y↦→ 0.5(y + z)
x↦→ 0.5(x + z)
Figure 21. Left: Topology change with many-to-one maps: two neurons activated with
the absolute value function can disentangle two concentric circles in a single step, transform-
ing them into linearly separable sets. Right: Topology change by embedding into higher
dimensions and performing the disentangling operations therein.
Adding to the ﬁrst point (i), since an aﬃne map takes the form x↦→ UΣVx +b, it provides
the capability to translate (by the vector b), rotate/reﬂect (by the orthogonal matrices U and V ),
and stretch/shrink (by the nonnegative diagonal matrix Σ); ReLU-activation adds folding to the
arsenal — an important capability. For example, to transform the surface of a donut (torus) into
the surface of a croissant (sphere) as in Figure 22, the ﬁrst two operations may be achieved with
appropriate aﬃne maps but the last one requires that we fold the doubly-pinched torus into a
croissant surface.
Acknowledgment. We thank David Bindel for very helpful discussions on ﬂoating point arith-
metic. We would like to acknowledge support for this project from the National Science Foundation
(NSF grant IIS 1546413), the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA D15AP00109
and a Director’s Fellowship), and the University of Chicago (Chicago–Vienna Faculty Grant and
Eckhardt Faculty Fund).
4Width in excess of input dimension.
32 G. NAITZAT, A. ZHITNIKOV, AND L.-H. LIM
Figure 22. Donut to croissant: torus→ pinched torus→ doubly-pinched torus→ sphere.
Betti numbers: (1, 2, 1)→ (1, 1, 1)→ (1, 1, 2)→ (1, 0, 1).
References
[1] S. Basu and A. Rizzie. Multi-degree bounds on the Betti numbers of real varieties and semi-algebraic sets and
applications. Discrete Comput. Geom., 59(3):553–620, 2018.
[2] C. Bayer, O. Enge-Rosenblatt, M. Bator, and U. M¨ onks. Sensorless drive diagnosis using automated feature
extraction, signiﬁcance ranking and reduction. In Proceedings of 2013 IEEE 18th Conference on Emerging Tech-
nologies & Factory Automation, ETFA 2013, Cagliari, Italy, September 10-13, 2013 , pages 1–4, 2013.
[3] M. Bianchini and F. Scarselli. On the complexity of neural network classiﬁers: A comparison between shallow
and deep architectures. IEEE transactions on neural networks and learning systems , 25(8):1553–1565, 2014.
[4] J.-D. Boissonnat, S. Pritam, and D. Pareek. Strong Collapse for Persistence. InESA 2018 - 26th Annual European
Symposium on Algorithms , pages 67:1–67:13, Helsinki, Finland, Aug. 2018.
[5] M. M. Breunig, H.-P. Kriegel, R. T. Ng, and J. Sander. Lof: Identifying density-based local outliers. InProceedings
of the 2000 ACM SIGMOD International Conference on Management of Data , SIGMOD 00, page 93104, New
York, NY, USA, 2000. Association for Computing Machinery.
[6] G. Carlsson. The shape of data. In Foundations of computational mathematics, Budapest 2011 , volume 403 of
London Math. Soc. Lecture Note Ser. , pages 16–44. Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge, 2013.
[7] G. Carlsson. Topological pattern recognition for point cloud data. Acta Numer., 23:289–368, 2014.
[8] G. Carlsson, T. Ishkhanov, V. De Silva, and A. Zomorodian. On the local behavior of spaces of natural images.
Int. J. Comput. Vis. , 76(1):1–12, 2008.
[9] G. Carlsson, G. Singh, and A. Zomorodian. Computing multidimensional persistence.J. Comput. Geom., 1(1):72–
100, 2010.
[10] G. Carlsson and A. Zomorodian. The theory of multidimensional persistence. Discrete Comput. Geom., 42(1):71–
93, 2009.
[11] M. Courbariaux, Y. Bengio, and J.-P. David. Training deep neural networks with low precision multiplications.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.7024 , 2014.
[12] V. De Silva and G. Carlsson. Topological estimation using witness complexes. In M. Gross, H. Pﬁster, M. Alexa,
and S. Rusinkiewicz, editors, SPBG’04 Symposium on Point - Based Graphics 2004 . The Eurographics Associ-
ation, 2004.
[13] J. Deng, W. Dong, R. Socher, L.-J. Li, K. Li, and L. Fei-Fei. ImageNet: A Large-Scale Hierarchical Image
Database. In CVPR09, 2009.
[14] P. Dlotko and H. Wagner. Simpliﬁcation of complexes for persistent homology computations.Homology Homotopy
Appl., 16(1):49–63, 2014.
[15] H. Edelsbrunner, D. Letscher, and A. Zomorodian. Topological persistence and simpliﬁcation. In 41st Annual
Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science (Redondo Beach, CA, 2000) , pages 454–463. IEEE Comput.
Soc. Press, Los Alamitos, CA, 2000.
[16] D. Eigen, J. Rolfe, R. Fergus, and Y. Lecun. Understanding deep architectures using a recursive convolutional
network. In International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR2014), CBLS, April 2014 , 2014.
[17] A. Gabrielov, N. Vorobjov, and T. Zell. Betti numbers of semialgebraic and sub-Pfaﬃan sets. J. London Math.
Soc. (2), 69(1):27–43, 2004.
[18] C. Giusti, E. Pastalkova, C. Curto, and V. Itskov. Clique topology reveals intrinsic geometric structure in neural
correlations. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA , 112(44):13455–13460, 2015.
TOPOLOGY OF DEEP NEURAL NETWORKS 33
[19] X. Glorot, A. Bordes, and Y. Bengio. Deep sparse rectiﬁer neural networks. In Proceedings of the Fourteenth
International Conference on Artiﬁcial Intelligence and Statistics, AISTATS 2011, Fort Lauderdale, USA, April
11-13, 2011, pages 315–323, 2011.
[20] S. Gupta, A. Agrawal, K. Gopalakrishnan, and P. Narayanan. Deep learning with limited numerical precision.
In International Conference on Machine Learning , pages 1737–1746, 2015.
[21] W. H. Guss and R. Salakhutdinov. On characterizing the capacity of neural networks using algebraic topology.
CoRR, abs/1802.04443, 2018.
[22] G. Henselman and R. Ghrist. Matroid Filtrations and Computational Persistent Homology. ArXiv e-prints, June
2016.
[23] I. Hubara, M. Courbariaux, D. Soudry, R. El-Yaniv, and Y. Bengio. Quantized neural networks: training neural
networks with low precision weights and activations. J. Mach. Learn. Res. , 18:Paper No. 187, 30, 2017.
[24] F. A. Khasawneh, E. Munch, and J. A. Perea. Chatter classiﬁcation in turning using machine learning and
topological data analysis. CoRR, abs/1804.02261, 2018.
[25] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. In 3rd International Conference on
Learning Representations, ICLR 2015, San Diego, CA, USA, May 7-9, 2015, Conference Track Proceedings ,
2015.
[26] A. Krizhevsky, V. Nair, and G. Hinton. Cifar-10 (canadian institute for advanced research), 2009.
[27] A. Krizhevsky, I. Sutskever, and G. E. Hinton. Imagenet classiﬁcation with deep convolutional neural networks.
Commun. ACM, 60(6):84–90, May 2017.
[28] Y. LeCun, L. Bottou, Y. Bengio, and P. Haﬀner. Gradient-based learning applied to document recognition. In
Intelligent Signal Processing, pages 306–351. IEEE Press, 2001.
[29] A. B. Lee, K. S. Pedersen, and D. Mumford. The nonlinear statistics of high-contrast patches in natural images.
International Journal of Computer Vision , 54(1-3):83–103, 2003.
[30] L. Li, W.-Y. Cheng, B. S. Glicksberg, O. Gottesman, R. Tamler, R. Chen, E. P. Bottinger, and J. T. Dudley.
Identiﬁcation of type 2 diabetes subgroups through topological analysis of patient similarity.Science translational
medicine, 7(311):311ra174–311ra174, 2015.
[31] L.-H. Lim. Hodge laplacians on graphs. SIAM Rev., 62(4):to appear, 2020.
[32] V. Lohweg, J. L. Hoﬀmann, H. D¨ orksen, R. Hildebrand, E. Gillich, J. Hofmann, and J. Schaede. Banknote
authentication with mobile devices. In Media Watermarking, Security, and Forensics 2013, Burlingame, CA,
USA, February 5-7, 2013, Proceedings, page 866507, 2013.
[33] R. J. Lyon, B. W. Stappers, S. Cooper, J. M. Brooke, and J. D. Knowles. Fifty years of pulsar candidate
selection: from simple ﬁlters to a new principled real-time classiﬁcation approach. Monthly Notices of the Royal
Astronomical Society, 459(1):1104–1123, 04 2016.
[34] A. L. Maas, A. Y. Hannun, and A. Y. Ng. Rectiﬁer nonlinearities improve neural network acoustic models. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Machine Learning , Atlanta, Georgia, 2013.
[35] J. Milnor. Morse theory. Based on lecture notes by M. Spivak and R. Wells. Annals of Mathematics Studies, No.
51. Princeton University Press, Princeton, N.J., 1963.
[36] J. W. Milnor. On the Betti numbers of real varieties. Proc. Amer. Math. Soc., 15:275–280, 1964.
[37] K. Mischaikow and V. Nanda. Morse theory for ﬁltrations and eﬃcient computation of persistent homology.
Discrete Comput. Geom., 50(2):330–353, 2013.
[38] G. Mont´ ufar, R. Pascanu, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio. On the number of linear regions of deep neural networks. In
Proceedings of the 27th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems - Volume 2, NIPS14,
page 29242932, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2014. MIT Press.
[39] V. Nair and G. E. Hinton. Rectiﬁed linear units improve restricted boltzmann machines. In Proceedings of the
27th International Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-10), June 21-24, 2010, Haifa, Israel , pages 807–814,
2010.
[40] G. Naitzat, N. Lokare, J. Silva, and I. Kaynar-Kabul. M-boost: Proﬁling and reﬁning deep neural networks with
topological data analysis. In KDD 2018 Workshop on Interactive Data Exploration and Analytics, London, UK,
August 20, 2018 , 2018.
[41] Y. Netzer, T. Wang, A. Coates, A. Bissacco, B. Wu, and A. Y. Ng. Reading digits in natural images with
unsupervised feature learning. In NIPS Workshop on Deep Learning and Unsupervised Feature Learning 2011 ,
2011.
[42] J. L. Nielson, J. Paquette, A. W. Liu, C. F. Gu, C. A. Tovar, T. Inoue, A. Irvine, J. C. Gensel, J. Kloke, T. C.
Petrossian, et al. Topological data analysis for discovery in preclinical spinal cord injury and traumatic brain
injury. Nature communications, 6:8581, 2015.
[43] P. Niyogi, S. Smale, and S. Weinberger. Finding the homology of submanifolds with high conﬁdence from random
samples. Discrete Comput. Geom., 39(1-3):419–441, 2008.
[44] C. Olah. Neural networks, manifolds, and topology. http://colah.github.io/posts/
2014-03-NN-Manifolds-Topology/ , 2014.
34 G. NAITZAT, A. ZHITNIKOV, AND L.-H. LIM
[45] M. L. Overton. Numerical computing with IEEE ﬂoating point arithmetic . Society for Industrial and Applied
Mathematics (SIAM), Philadelphia, PA, 2001. Including one theorem, one rule of thumb, and one hundred and
one exercises.
[46] P. T. Pearson. Visualizing clusters in artiﬁcial neural networks using morse theory.Adv. Artiﬁcial Neural Systems,
2013:486363:1–486363:8, 2013.
[47] J. A. Perea, A. Deckard, S. B. Haase, and J. Harer. Sw1pers: Sliding windows and 1-persistence scoring;
discovering periodicity in gene expression time series data. BMC Bioinformatics, 16:257:1–257:12, 2015.
[48] J. A. Perea and J. Harer. Sliding windows and persistence: an application of topological methods to signal
analysis. Found. Comput. Math., 15(3):799–838, 2015.
[49] K. N. Ramamurthy, K. Varshney, and K. Mody. Topological data analysis of decision boundaries with applica-
tion to model selection. In K. Chaudhuri and R. Salakhutdinov, editors, Proceedings of the 36th International
Conference on Machine Learning , volume 97 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Research , pages 5351–5360,
Long Beach, California, USA, 09–15 Jun 2019. PMLR.
[50] B. Rieck, M. Togninalli, C. Bock, M. Moor, M. Horn, T. Gumbsch, and K. M. Borgwardt. Neural persistence:
A complexity measure for deep neural networks using algebraic topology. In 7th International Conference on
Learning Representations, ICLR 2019, New Orleans, LA, USA, May 6-9, 2019 , 2019.
[51] B. Sch¨ olkopf and A. J. Smola.Learning with Kernels: support vector machines, regularization, optimization, and
beyond. Adaptive computation and machine learning series. MIT Press, 2002.
[52] F. Seide, G. Li, and D. Yu. Conversational speech transcription using context-dependent deep neural networks.
In Twelfth annual conference of the international speech communication association , 2011.
[53] G. Singh, F. M´ emoli, and G. E. Carlsson. Topological methods for the analysis of high dimensional data sets
and 3d object recognition. In Symposium on Point Based Graphics, Prague, Czech Republic, 2007. Proceedings ,
pages 91–100, 2007.
[54] A. Storjohann. Near optimal algorithms for computing smith normal forms of integer matrices. In Proceedings
of the 1996 International Symposium on Symbolic and Algebraic Computation, ISSAC ’96, Zurich, Switzerland,
July 24-26, 1996 , pages 267–274, 1996.
[55] T. P. Zell. Quantitative study of semi-Pfaﬃan sets . ProQuest LLC, Ann Arbor, MI, 2003. Thesis (Ph.D.)–Purdue
University.
[56] L. Zhang, G. Naitzat, and L.-H. Lim. Tropical geometry of deep neural networks. In J. Dy and A. Krause, editors,
Proceedings of the 35th International Conference on Machine Learning , volume 80 of Proceedings of Machine
Learning Research, pages 5824–5832, Stockholmsmssan, Stockholm Sweden, 10–15 Jul 2018. PMLR.
[57] A. Zomorodian and G. Carlsson. Computing persistent homology. Discrete Comput. Geom., 33(2):249–274, 2005.
Computational and Applied Mathematics Initiative, Department of Statistics, University of Chicago,
Chicago, IL 60637-1514.
E-mail address: gregn@galton.uchicago.edu, lekheng@uchicago.edu
F aculty of Electrical Engineering, Technion – Israel Institute of Technology, Haifa 32000, Israel
E-mail address: andreyz@technion.ac.il