Failures of Gradient-Based Deep Learning
Shai Shalev-Shwartz1, Ohad Shamir2, and Shaked Shammah1
1School of Computer Science and Engineering, The Hebrew University
2Weizmann Institute of Science
Abstract
In recent years, Deep Learning has become the go-to solution for a broad range of applications,
often outperforming state-of-the-art. However, it is important, for both theoreticians and practitioners,
to gain a deeper understanding of the difﬁculties and limitations associated with common approaches
and algorithms. We describe four types of simple problems, for which the gradient-based algorithms
commonly used in deep learning either fail or suffer from signiﬁcant difﬁculties. We illustrate the failures
through practical experiments, and provide theoretical insights explaining their source, and how they
might be remedied1.
1 Introduction
The success stories of deep learning form an ever lengthening list of practical breakthroughs and state-of-
the-art performances, ranging the ﬁelds of computer vision [23, 14, 25, 33], audio and natural language
processing and generation [5, 15, 11, 34], as well as robotics [24, 26], to name just a few. The list of success
stories can be matched and surpassed by a list of practical “tips and tricks”, from different optimization
algorithms, parameter tuning methods [30, 22], initialization schemes [10], architecture designs [31], loss
functions, data augmentation [23] and so on.
The current theoretical understanding of deep learning is far from being sufﬁcient for a rigorous analysis
of the difﬁculties faced by practitioners. Progress must be made from both parties: from a practitioner’s per-
spective, emphasizing the difﬁculties provides practical insights to the theoretician, which in turn, supplies
theoretical insights and guarantees, further strengthening and sharpening practical intuitions and wisdom.
In particular, understanding failures of existing algorithms is as important as understanding where they
succeed.
Our goal in this paper is to present and discuss families of simple problems for which commonly used
methods do not show as exceptional a performance as one might expect. We use empirical results and
insights as a ground on which to build a theoretical analysis, characterising the sources of failure. Those
understandings are aligned, and sometimes lead to, different approaches, either for an architecture, loss
function, or an optimization scheme, and explain their superiority when applied to members of those fami-
lies. Interestingly, the sources for failure in our experiment do not seem to relate to stationary point issues
such as spurious local minima or a plethora of saddle points, a topic of much recent interest (e.g. [6, 3]),
1This paper was done with the support of the Intel Collaborative Research institute for Computational Intelligence (ICRI-CI)
and is part of the “Why & When Deep Learning works – looking inside Deep Learning” ICRI-CI paper bundle
1
arXiv:1703.07950v2  [cs.LG]  26 Apr 2017
but rather to more subtle issues, having to do with informativeness of the gradients, signal-to-noise ratios,
conditioning etc. The code for running all our experiments is available online2.
We start off in Section 2 by discussing a class of simple learning problems for which the gradient infor-
mation, central to deep learning algorithms, provably carries negligible information on the target function
which we attempt to learn. This result is a property of the learning problems themselves, and holds for any
speciﬁc network architecture one may choose for tackling the learning problem, implying that no gradient-
based method is likely to succeed. Our analysis relies on tools and insights from the Statistical Queries
literature, and underscores one of the main deﬁciencies of Deep Learning: its reliance on local properties of
the loss function, with the objective being of a global nature.
Next, in Section 3, we tackle the ongoing dispute between two common approaches to learning. Most,
if not all, learning and optimization problems can be viewed as some structured set of sub-problems. The
ﬁrst approach, which we refer to as the “end-to-end” approach, will tend to solve all of the sub-problems
together in one shot, by optimizing a single primary objective. The second approach, which we refer to as the
“decomposition” one, will tend to handle these sub-problems separately, solving each one by deﬁning and
optimizing additional objectives, and not rely solely on the primary objective. The beneﬁts of the end-to-end
approach, both in terms of requiring a smaller amount of labeling and prior knowledge, and perhaps enabling
more expressive architectures, cannot be ignored. On the other hand, intuitively and empirically, the extra
supervision injected through decomposition is helpful in the optimization process. We experiment with a
simple problem in which application of the two approaches is possible, and the distinction between them
is clear and intuitive. We observe that an end-to-end approach can be much slower than a decomposition
method, to the extent that, as the scale of the problem grows, no progress is observed. We analyze this gap
by showing, theoretically and empirically, that the gradients are much more noisy and less informative with
the end-to-end approach, as opposed to the decomposition approach, explaining the disparity in practical
performance.
In Section 4, we demonstrate the importance of both the network’s architecture and the optimization
algorithm on the training time. While the choice of architecture is usually studied in the context of its
expressive power, we show that even when two architectures have the same expressive power for a given
task, there may be a tremendous difference in the ability to optimize them. We analyze the required runtime
of gradient descent for the two architectures through the lens of the condition number of the problem.
We further show that conditioning techniques can yield additional orders of magnitude speedups. The
experimental setup in this section is around a seemingly simple problem — encoding a piece-wise linear
one-dimensional curve. Despite the simplicity of this problem, we show that following the common rule of
“perhaps I should use a deeper/wider network”3 does not signiﬁcantly help here.
Finally, in Section 5, we consider deep learning’s reliance on “vanilla” gradient information for the
optimization process. We previously discussed the deﬁciency of using a local property of the objective
in directing global optimization. Here, we focus on a simple case in which it is possible to solve the
optimization problem based on local information, but not in the form of a gradient. We experiment with
architectures that contain activation functions with ﬂat regions, which leads to the well known vanishing
gradient problem. Practitioners take great care when working with such activation functions, and many
heuristic tricks are applied in order to initialize the network’s weights in non-ﬂat areas of its activations.
Here, we show that by using a different update rule, we manage to solve the learning problem efﬁciently.
Moreover, one can show convergence guarantees for a family of such functions. This provides a clean
example where non-gradient-based optimization schemes can overcome the limitations of gradient-based
2 https://github.com/shakedshammah/failures_of_DL. See command lines in Appendix D.
3See http://joelgrus.com/2016/05/23/fizz-buzz-in-tensorflow/ for the inspiration behind this quote.
2
learning.
2 Parities and Linear-Periodic Functions
Most existing deep learning algorithms are gradient-based methods; namely, algorithms which optimize
an objective through access to its gradient w.r.t. some weight vector w, or estimates of the gradient. We
consider a setting where the goal of this optimization process is to learn some underlying hypothesis class
H, of which one member,h∈H , is responsible for labelling the data. This yields an optimization problem
of the form
min
w
Fh(w).
The underlying assumption is that the gradient of the objective w.r.t. w,∇Fh(w), contains useful informa-
tion regarding the target functionh, and will help us make progress.
Below, we discuss a family of problems for which with high probability, at any ﬁxed point, the gradient,
∇Fh(w), will be essentially the same regardless of the underlying target functionh. Furthermore, we prove
that this holds independently of the choice of architecture or parametrization, and using a deeper/wider
network will not help. The family we study is that of compositions of linear and periodic functions, and we
experiment with the classical problem of learning parities. Our empirical and theoretical study shows that
indeed, if there’s little information in the gradient, using it for learning cannot succeed.
2.1 Experiment
We begin with the simple problem of learning random parities: After choosing somev∗∈{ 0, 1}d uniformly
at random, our goal is to train a predictor mapping x∈{ 0, 1}d toy = (−1)⟨x,v∗⟩, where x is uniformly
distributed. In words,y indicates whether the number of1’s in a certain subset of coordinates ofx (indicated
by v∗) is odd or even.
For our experiments, we use the hinge loss, and a simple network architecture of one fully connected
layer of width 10d > 3d
2 with ReLU activations, and a fully connected output layer with linear activation
and a single unit. Note that this class realizes the parity function corresponding to any v∗ (see Lemma 5 in
the appendix).
Empirically, as the dimensiond increases, so does the difﬁculty of learning, which can be measured in
the accuracy we arrive at after a ﬁxed number of training iterations, to the point where around d = 30, no
advance beyond random performance is observed after reasonable time. Figure 1 illustrates the results.
2.2 Analysis
To formally explain the failure from a geometric perspective, consider the stochastic optimization problem
associated with learning a target functionh,
min
w
Fh(w) := E
x
[ℓ(pw(x),h (x))], (1)
whereℓ is a loss function, x are the stochastic inputs (assumed to be vectors in Euclidean space), andpw is
some predictor parametrized by a parameter vector w (e.g. a neural network of a certain architecture). We
will assume thatF is differentiable. A key quantity we will be interested in studying is the variance of the
3
0 1 2 3 4 5
·104
0.5
1
Training Iterations
Accuracy
d=5
d=10
d=30
Figure 1: Parity Experiment: Accuracy as a function of the number of training iterations, for various input
dimensions.
gradient ofF with respect toh, whenh is drawn uniformly at random from a collection of candidate target
functionsH:
Var(H,F, w) = E
h
∇Fh(w)− E
h′
∇Fh′(w)

2
(2)
Intuitively, this measures the expected amount of “signal” about the underlying target function contained in
the gradient. As we will see later, this variance correlates with the difﬁculty of solving (1) using gradient-
based methods4.
The following theorem bounds this variance term.
Theorem 1 Suppose that
• Hconsists of real-valued functionsh satisfying Ex[h2(x)]≤ 1, such that for any two distincth,h′∈
H, Ex[h(x)h′(x)] = 0.
• pw(x) is differentiable w.r.t.w, and satisﬁes Ex
[
∥ ∂
∂wpw(x)∥2]
≤G(w)2 for some scalarG(w).
• The loss function ℓ in (1) is either the square loss ℓ(ˆy,y ) = 1
2(ˆy−y)2 or a classiﬁcation loss of the
formℓ(ˆy,y ) =r(ˆy·y) for some 1-Lipschitz functionr, and the target functionh takes values in{±1}.
Then
Var(H,F, w) ≤ G(w)2
|H| .
The proof is given in Appendix B.1. The theorem implies that if we try to learn an unknown target function,
possibly coming from a large collection of uncorrelated functions, then the sensitivity of the gradient to the
target function at any point decreases linearly with|H|.
Before we make a more general statement, let us return to the case of parities, and study it through
the lens of this framework. Suppose that our target function is some parity function chosen uniformly at
random, i.e. a random element from the set of 2d functionsH ={x↦→ (−1)⟨x,v∗⟩ : v∗∈{ 0, 1}d}. These
4This should not be confused with the variance of gradient estimates used by SGD, which we discuss in Section 3.
4
are binary functions, which are easily seen to be mutually orthogonal: Indeed, for any v, v′,
E
x
[
(−1)⟨x,v⟩(−1)⟨x,v′⟩
]
= E
x
[
(−1)⟨x,v+v′⟩
]
=
d∏
i=1
E
[
(−1)xi(vi+v′
i)
]
=
d∏
i=1
(−1)vi+v′
i + (−1)−(vi+v′
i)
2
which is non-zero if and only if v = v′. Therefore, by Theorem 1, we get that Var(H,F, w)≤G(w)2/2d
– that is, exponentially small in the dimension d. By Chebyshev’s inequality, this implies that the gradient
at any point w will be extremely concentrated around a ﬁxed point independent ofh.
This phenomenon of exponentially-small variance can also be observed for other distributions, and learn-
ing problems other than parities. Indeed, in [29], it was shown that this also holds in a more general setup,
when the outputy corresponds to a linear function composed with a periodic one, and the inputx is sampled
from a smooth distribution:
Theorem 2 (Shamir 2016) Letψ be a ﬁxed periodic function, and letH ={x↦→ ψ(v∗⊤x) :∥v∗∥ = r}
for some r >0. Suppose x∈ Rd is sampled from an arbitrary mixture of distributions with the following
property: The square root of the density functionϕ has a Fourier transform ˆϕ satisfying
∫
x:∥x∥>r ˆϕ2(x)dx∫
x ˆϕ2(x)dx ≤
exp(−Ω(r)). Then ifF denotes the objective function with respect to the squared loss,
Var(H,F, w)≤O (exp(−Ω(d)) + exp(−Ω(r))).
The condition on the Fourier transform of the density is generally satisﬁed for smooth distributions (e.g.
arbitrary Gaussians whose covariance matrices are positive deﬁnite, with all eigenvalues at least Ω(1/r)).
Thus, the bound is extremely small as long as the norm r and the dimension d are moderately large, and
indicates that the gradients contains little signal on the underlying target function.
Based on these bounds, one can also formally prove that a gradient-based method, under a reasonable
model, will fail in returning a reasonable predictor, unless the number of iterations is exponentially large in
r andd 5 . This provides strong evidence that gradient-based methods indeed cannot learn random parities
and linear-periodic functions. We emphasize that these results hold regardless of which class of predictors
we use (e.g. they can be arbitrarily complex neural networks) – the problem lies in using a gradient-based
method to train them. Also, we note that the difﬁculty lies in the random choice of v∗, and the problem is
not difﬁcult if v∗ is known and ﬁxed in advance (for example, for a full parityv∗ = (1,..., 1), this problem
is known to be solvable with an appropriate LSTM network [17]).
Finally, we remark that the connection between parities, difﬁculty of learning and orthogonal functions
is not new, and has already been made in the context of statistical query learning [21, 1]. This refers to
algorithms which are constrained to interact with data by receiving estimates of the expected value of some
query over the underlying distribution (e.g. the expected value of the ﬁrst coordinate), and it is well-known
that parities cannot be learned with such algorithms. Recently, [8] have formally shown that gradient-based
methods with an approximate gradient oracle can be implemented as a statistical query algorithm, which
implies that gradient-based methods are indeed unlikely to solve learning problems which are known to be
hard in the statistical queries framework, in particular parities. In the discussion on random parities above,
we have simply made the connection between gradient-based methods and parities more explicit, by direct
examination of gradients’ variance w.r.t. the target function.
5Formally, this requires an oracle-based model, where given a point w, the algorithm receives the gradient at w up to some
arbitrary error much smaller than machine precision. See [29, Theorem 4] for details.
5
3 Decomposition vs. End-to-end
Many practical learning problems, and more generally, algorithmic problems, can be viewed as a structured
composition of sub-problems. Applicable approaches for a solution can either be tackling the problem in
an end-to-end manner, or by decomposition. Whereas for a traditional algorithmic solution, the “divide-
and-conquer” strategy is an obvious choice, the ability of deep learning to utilize big data and expressive
architectures has made “end-to-end training” an attractive alternative. Prior results of end-to-end [24, 11]
and decomposition and added feedback [13, 16, 32, 2] approaches show success in both directions. Here,
we try to address the following questions: What is the price of the rather appealing end-to-end approach? Is
letting a network “learn by itself” such a bad idea? When is it necessary, or worth the effort, to “help” it?
There are various aspects which can be considered in this context. For example, [28] analyzed the differ-
ence between the approaches from the sample complexity point of view. Here, we focus on the optimization
aspect, showing that an end-to-end approach might suffer from non-informative or noisy gradients, which
may signiﬁcantly affect the training time. Helping the SGD process by decomposing the problem leads
to much faster training. We present a simple experiment, motivated by questions every practitioner must
answer when facing a new, non trivial problem: What exactly is the required training data, what network ar-
chitecture should be used, and what is the right distribution of development efforts. These are all correlated
questions with no clear answer. Our experiments and analysis show that making the wrong choice can be
expensive.
3.1 Experiment
Our experiment compares the two approaches in a computer vision setting, where convolutional neural
networks (CNN) have become the most widely used and successful algorithmic architectures. We deﬁne
a family of problems, parameterized by k ∈ N, and show a gap (rapidly growing with k) between the
performances of the end-to-end and decomposition approaches.
LetX denote the space of28×28 binary images, with a distributionD deﬁned by the following sampling
procedure:
• Sampleθ∼U([0,π ]),l∼U([5, 28− 5]), (x,y )∼U([0, 27])2.
• The image xθ,l,(x,y) associated with the above sample is set to 0 everywhere, except for a straight line
of lengthl, centered at (x,y ), and rotated at an angleθ. Note that as the images space is discrete, we
round the values corresponding to the points on the lines to the closest integer coordinate.
Let us deﬁne an “intermediate” labeling function y : X→{± 1}, denoting whether the line in a given
image slopes upwards or downwards, formally:
y(xθ,l,(x,y)) =
{
1 ifθ<π/ 2
−1 otherwise .
Figure 2 shows a few examples. We can now deﬁne the problem for each k. Each input instance is a
tuple xk
1 := (x1,..., xk) ofk images sampled i.i.d. as above. The target output is the parity over the image
labelsy(x1),...,y (xk), namely ˜y(xk
1) =∏
j=1...ky(xj).
Many architectures of DNN can be used for predicting ˜y(xk
1) given xk
1. A natural “high-level” choice
can be:
6
Figure 2: Section 3.1’s experiment - examples of samples fromX. They values of the top and bottom rows
are 1 and−1, respectively.
• Feed each of the images, separately, to a single CNN (of some standard speciﬁc architecture, for
example, LeNet-like), denoted N (1)
w1 and parameterized by its weights vector w1, outputting a single
scalar, which can be regarded as a “score”.
• Concatenate the “scores” of a tuple’s entries, transform them to the range[0, 1] using a sigmoid func-
tion, and feed the resulting vector into another network, N (2)
w2 , of a similar architecture to the one
deﬁned in Section 2, outputting a single “tuple-score”, which can then be thresholded for obtaining
the binary prediction.
Let the whole architecture be denoted Nw. Assuming that N (1) is expressive enough to provide, at least,
a weak learner for y (a reasonable assumption), and that N (2) can express the relevant parity function (see
Lemma 5 in the appendix), we obtain that this architecture has the potential for good performance.
The ﬁnal piece of the experimental setting is the choice of a loss function. Clearly, the primary loss
which we’d like to minimize is the expected zero-one loss over the prediction, Nw(xk
1), and the label,
˜y(xk
1), namely:
˜L0−1(w) := E
xk
1
[
Nw(xk
1)̸= ˜y(xk
1)
]
A “secondary” loss which can be used in the decomposition approach is the zero-one loss over the
prediction ofN (1)
w1 (xk
1) and the respectivey(xk
1) value:
L0−1(w1) := E
xk
1
[
N (1)
w1 (xk
1)̸=y(xk
1)
]
Let ˜L,L be some differentiable surrogates for ˜L0−1,L 0−1. A classical end-to-end approach will be to
minimize ˜L, and only it; this is our “primary” objective. We have no explicit desire for N (1) to output any
7
0.3
1
k = 1
0.3
1
k = 2
0.3
1
k = 3
0.3
1
k = 4
Figure 3: Performance comparison, Section 3.1’s experiment. The red and blue curves correspond to the
end-to-end and decomposition approaches, respectively. The plots show the zero-one accuracy with respect
to the primary objective, over a held out test set, as a function of training iterations. We have trained the
end-to-end network for 20000 SGD iterations, and the decomposition networks for only 2500 iterations.
speciﬁc value, and hence L is, a priori, irrelevant. A decomposition approach would be to minimize both
losses, under the assumption that L can “direct” w1 towards an “area” in which we know that the resulting
outputs ofN (1) can be separated by N (2). Note that using L is only possible when the y values are known
to us.
Empirically, when comparing performances based on the “primary” objective, we see that the end-to-end
approach is signiﬁcantly inferior to the decomposition approach (see Figure 3). Using decomposition, we
quickly arrive at a good solution, regardless of the tuple’s length,k (as long ask is in the range where perfect
input toN (2) is solvable by SGD, as described in Section 2). However, using the end-to-end approach works
only fork = 1, 2, and completely fails already when k = 3 (or larger). This may be somewhat surprising,
as the end-to-end approach optimizes exactly the primary objective, composed of two sub-problems each of
which is easily solved on its own, and with no additional irrelevant objectives.
3.2 Analysis
We study the experiment from two directions: Theoretically, by analyzing the gradient variance (as in
Section 2), for a somewhat idealized version of the experiment, and empirically, by estimating a signal-
to-noise ratio (SNR) measure of the stochastic gradients used by the algorithm. Both approaches point to a
similar issue: With the end-to-end approach, the gradients do not seem to be sufﬁciently informative for the
optimization process to succeed.
Before continuing, we note that a conceptually similar experiment to ours has been reported in [13] (also
involving a composition of an image recognition task and a simple Boolean formula, and with qualitatively
similar results). However, that experiment came without a formal analysis, and the failure was attributed
to local minima. In contrast, our analysis indicates that the problem is not due to local-minima (or saddle
points), but from the gradients being non-informative and noisy.
We begin with a theoretical result, which considers our experimental setup under two simplifying as-
sumptions: First, the input is assumed to be standard Gaussian, and second, we assume the labels are gener-
ated by a target function of the formhu(xk
1) =∏k
l=1 sign(u⊤xl). The ﬁrst assumption is merely to simplify
the analysis (similar results can be shown more generally, but the argument becomes more involved). The
second assumption is equivalent to assuming that the labels y(x) of individual images can be realized by a
linear predictor, which is roughly the case for simple image labelling task such as ours.
Theorem 3 Let xk
1 denote a k-tuple (x1,..., xk) of input instances, and assume that each xl is i.i.d. stan-
8
dard Gaussian in Rd. Deﬁne
hu(xk
1) =
k∏
l=1
sign(u⊤xl),
and the objective (w.r.t. some predictorpw parameterized by w)
F (w) = E
xk
1
[
ℓ(pw(xk
1),h u(xk
1)
]
.
Where the loss function ℓ is either the square loss ℓ(ˆy,y ) = 1
2(ˆy−y)2 or a classiﬁcation loss of the form
ℓ(ˆy,y ) =r(ˆy·y) for some 1-Lipschitz functionr.
Fix some w, and suppose that pw(x) is differentiable w.r.t. w and satisﬁes Exk
1
[
∥ ∂
∂wpw(xk
1∥2]
≤
G(w)2. Then ifH ={hu : u∈ Rd,∥u∥ = 1}, then
Var(H,F, w) ≤ G(w)2·O
(√
k log(d)
d
)k
.
The proof is given in Section B.2. The theorem shows that the “signal” regarding hu (or, if applying
to our experiment, the signal for learning N (1), had y been drawn uniformly at random from some set of
functions overX) decreases exponentially withk. This is similar to the parity result in Section 2, but with an
important difference: Whereas the base of the exponent there was 1/2, here it is the much smaller quantity
k log(d)/
√
d (e.g. in our experiment, we havek≤ 4 andd = 282). This indicates that already for very small
values of k, the information contained in the gradients about u can become extremely small, and prevent
gradient-based methods from succeeding, fully according with our experiment.
To complement this analysis (which applies to an idealized version of our experiment), we consider a
related “signal-to-noise” (SNR) quantity, which can be empirically estimated in our actual experiment. To
motivate it, note that a key quantity used in the proof of Theorem 3, for estimating the amount of signal
carried by the gradient, is the squared norm of the correlation between the gradient of the predictor pw,
g(xk
1) := ∂
∂wpw(xk
1) and the target functionhu, which we denote by Sigu:
Sigu :=
 E
xk
1
[
hu(xk
1)g(xk
1)
]
2
.
We will consider the ratio between this quantity and a “noise” term Noiu, i.e. the variance of this correlation
over the samples:
Noiu := E
xk
1
hu(xk
1)g(xk
1)− E
xk
1
[
hu(xk
1)g(xk
1)
]
2
.
Since here the randomness is with respect to the data rather than the target function (as in Theorem 3),
we can estimate this SNR ratio in our experiment. It is well-known (e.g. [9]) that the amount of noise in
the stochastic gradient estimates used by stochastic gradient descent crucially affects its convergence rate.
Hence, smaller SNR should be correlated with worse performance.
We empirically estimated this SNR measure, Sigy/Noiy, for the gradients w.r.t. the weights of the last
layer of N (1) (which potentially learns our intermediate labeling function y) at the initialization point in
parameter space. The SNR estimate for various values ofk are plotted in Figure 4. We indeed see that when
k≥ 3, the SNR appears to approach extremely small values, where the estimator’s noise, and the additional
9
1 2 3 4
−7
−15
Figure 4: Section 3.1’s experiment: comparing the SNR for the end-to-end approach (red) and the decom-
position approach (blue), as a function ofk, in loge scale.
noise introduced by a ﬁnite ﬂoating point representation, can completely mask the signal, which can explain
the failure in this case.
In Section A in the Appendix, we also present a second, more synthetic, experiment, which demonstrates
a case where the decomposition approach directly decreases the stochastic noise in the SGD optimization
process, hence beneﬁting the convergence rate.
4 Architecture and Conditioning
Network architecture choice is a crucial element in the success of deep learning. New variants and develop-
ment of novel architectures are one of the main tools for achieving practical breakthroughs [14, 32]. When
choosing an architecture, one consideration is how to inject prior knowledge on the problem at hand, im-
proving the network’s expressiveness for that problem, while not dramatically increasing sample complexity.
Another aspect involves improving the computational complexity of training. In this section we formally
show how the choice of architecture affects the training time through the lens of the condition number of the
problem.
The study and practice of conditioning techniques, for convex and non-convex problems, gained much
attention recently (e.g., [18, 22, 7, 27]). Here we show how architectural choice may have a dramatic effect
on the applicability of better conditioning techniques.
The learning problem we consider in this section is that of encoding one-dimensional, piecewise lin-
ear curves. We show how different architectures, all of them of sufﬁcient expressive power for solving the
problem, have orders-of-magnitude difference in their condition numbers. In particular, this becomes appar-
ent when considering convolutional vs. fully connected layers. This sheds a new light over the success of
convolutional neural networks, which is generally attributed to their sample complexity beneﬁts. Moreover,
we show how conditioning, applied in conjunction with a better architecture choice, can further decrease
the condition number by orders of magnitude. The direct effect on the convergence rate is analyzed, and is
aligned with the signiﬁcant performance gaps observed empirically. We also demonstrate how performance
may not signiﬁcantly improve by employing deeper and more powerful architectures, as well as the price
that comes with choosing a sub-optimal architecture.
10
4.1 Experiments and Analysis
We experiment with various deep learning solutions for encoding the structure of one-dimensional, con-
tinuous, piecewise linear (PWL) curves. Any PWL curve with k pieces can be written as: f(x) = b +∑k
i=1ai[x−θi]+, where ai is the difference between the slope at the i’th segment and the (i− 1)’th seg-
ment. For example, the curve below can be parametrized byb = 1,a = (1,−2, 3),θ = (0, 2, 6).
The problem we consider is that of receiving a vector of the values off atx∈{ 0, 1,...,n −1}, namely
f := (f(0),f (1),...,f (n−1)), and outputting the values ofb,{ai,θi}k
i=1. We can think of this problem as
an encoding problem, since we would like to be able to rebuildf from the values ofb,{ai,θi}k
i=1. Observe
thatb =f(0), so from now on, let us assume without loss of generality thatb = 0.
Throughout our experiments, we use n = 100,k = 3. We sample{θi}i∈[k] uniformly without replace-
ment from{0, 1,...,n − 1}, and sample eachai i.i.d. uniformly from [−1, 1].
4.1.1 Convex Problem, Large Condition Number
As we assume that each θi is an integer in {0, 1,...,n − 1}, we can represent {ai,θi}k
i=1 as a vector
p∈ Rn such thatpj = 0 unless there is some i such thatθi = j, and in this case we set pj = ai. That is,
pj =∑k
i=1ai 1[θi=j−1].
This allows us to formalize the problem as a convex optimization problem. Deﬁne a matrix W∈ Rn,n
such thatWi,j = [i−j + 1]+. It is not difﬁcult to show that f = Wp. Moreover, W can be shown to be
invertible, so we can extract p from f by p =W−1f.
We hence start by attempting to learn this linear transformation directly, using a connected architecture
of one layer, withn output channels. Let the weights of this layer be denoted ˆU. We therefore minimize the
objective:
min
ˆU
E
f
[1
2(W−1f− ˆUf)2
]
(3)
where f is sampled according to some distribution. As a convex, realizable (by ˆU = W−1) problem,
convergence is guaranteed, and we can explicitly analyze its rate. However, perhaps unexpectedly, we
observe a very slow rate of convergence to a satisfactory solution, where signiﬁcant inaccuracies are present
at the non-smoothness points. Figure 5a illustrates the results.
To analyze the convergence rate of this approach, and to benchmark the performance of the next set of
experiments, we start off by giving an explicit expression forW−1:
Lemma 1 The inverse of W is the matrix U s.t. Ui,i = Ui+2,i = 1,Ui+1,i =−2, and the rest of the
coordinates ofU are zero.
The proof is given in Appendix B.3. Next, we analyze the iteration complexity of SGD for learning the
matrixU. To that end, we give an explicit expression for the expected value of the learned weight matrix at
each iterationt, denoted as ˆUt:
11
Lemma 2 Assume ˆU 0 = 0, and that Ef[Uﬀ⊤U⊤] =λI for someλ. Then, running SGD with learning rate
η over objective 3 fort iterations yields:
E ˆUt =ηλW⊤
t−1∑
i=0
(I−ηλWW⊤)i
The proof is given in Appendix B.4. Note that the assumption that Ef[Uﬀ⊤U⊤] = λI holds under the dis-
tributional assumption over the curves, as changes of direction in the curve are independent, and are sampled
each time from the same distribution. The following theorem establishes a lower bound on∥ E ˆUt+1−U∥,
which by Jensen’s inequality, implies a lower bound onE∥ ˆUt+1−U∥, the expected distance of ˆUt+1 from
U. Note that the lower bound holds even if we use all the data for updating (that is, gradient descent and not
stochastic gradient descent).
Theorem 4 Let W = QSV⊤ be the singular value decomposition of W . If ηλS 2
1,1 ≥ 1 then E ˆUt+1
diverges. Otherwise, we have
t + 1≤ S2
1,1
2S2n,n
⇒ ∥ E ˆUt+1−U∥≥ 0.5,
where the norm is the spectral norm. Furthermore, the condition number
S2
1,1
S2n,n
(whereS1,1,Sn,n are the top
and bottom singular values ofW ) is Ω(n3.5).
The proof is given in Appendix B.5. The theorem implies that the condition number of W, and hence, the
number of GD iterations required for convergence, scales quite poorly with n. In the next subsection, we
will try to decrease the condition number of the problem.
4.1.2 Improved Condition Number through Convolutional Architecture
Examining the explicit expression for U given in Lemma 1, we see that Uf can be written as a one-
dimensional convolution of f with the kernel [1,−2, 1]. Therefore, the mapping from f to p is realizable
using a convolutional layer.
Empirically, convergence to an accurate solution is faster using this architecture. Figure 5b illustrates
a few examples. To theoretically understand the beneﬁt of using a convolution, from the perspective of the
required number of iterations for training, we will consider the new problem’s condition number, providing
understanding of the gap in training time. In the previous section we saw that GD requiresΩ(n3.5) iterations
to learn the full matrixU. In the appendix (sections B.6 and B.7) we show that under some mild assumptions,
the condition number is only Θ(n3), and GD requires only that order of iterations to learn the optimal ﬁlter
[1,−2, 1].
4.1.3 Additional Improvement through Explicit Conditioning
In Section 4.1.2, despite observing an improvement from the fully connected architecture, we saw that GD
still requires Ω(n3) iterations even for the simple problem of learning the ﬁlter [1,−2, 1]. This motivates an
application of additional conditioning techniques, in the hope for extra performance gains.
First, let us explicitly represent the convolutional architecture as a linear regression problem. We perform
Vec2Row operation onf as follows: given a sample f, construct a matrix,F , of sizen× 3, such that thet’th
row ofF is [ft−1, ft, ft+1]. Then, we obtain a vanilla linear regression problem inR3, with the ﬁlter[1,−2, 1]
12
as its solution. Given a samplef, we can now approximate the correlation matrix ofF , denotedC∈ R3,3, by
settingCi,j = Ef,t[ft−2+ift−2+j]. We then calculate the matrixC−1/2 and replace every instance (namely, a
row ofF ) [ft−1, ft, ft+1] by the instance [ft−1, ft, ft+1]C−1/2. By construction, the correlation matrix of the
resulting instances is approximately the identity matrix, hence the condition number is approximately 1. It
follows (see again Appendix B.6) that SGD converges using order of log(1/ϵ) iterations, independently of
n. Empirically, we quickly converge to extremely accurate results, illustrated in Figure 5c.
We note that the use of a convolution architecture is crucial for the efﬁciency of the conditioning; had the
dimension of the problem not been reduced so dramatically, the difﬁculty of estimating a largen×n correla-
tion matrix scales strongly withn, and furthermore, its inversion becomes a costly operation. The combined
use of a better architecture and of conditioning is what allows us to gain this dramatic improvement.
4.1.4 Perhaps I should use a deeper network?
The solution arrived at in Section 4.1.3 indicates that a suitable architecture choice and conditioning scheme
can provide training time speedups of multiple orders of magnitude. Moreover, the beneﬁt of reducing the
number of parameters, in the transition from a fully connected architecture to a convolutional one, is shown
to be helpful in terms of convergence time. However, we should not rule out the possibility that a deeper,
wider network will not suffer from the deﬁciencies analyzed above for the convex case.
Motivated by the success of deep auto-encoders, we experiment with a deeper architecture for en-
coding f. Namely, we minimize minv1,v2 Ef[(f−Mv2(Nv1(f)))2], Where Nv1,M v2 are deep networks
parametrized by their weight vectors v1, v2, with the output of N being of dimension 2k, enough for real-
ization of the encoding problem. Each of the two networks has three layers with ReLU activations, except
for the output layer of M having a linear activation. The dimensions of the layers are, 500, 100, 2k forN,
and 100, 100,n forM.
Aligned with the intuition gained through the previous experiments, we observe that additional expres-
sive power, when unnecessary, does not solve inherent optimization problems, as this stronger Auto-Encoder
fails to capture the ﬁne details of f at its non-smooth points. See Figure 5d for examples.
5 Flat Activations
We now examine a different aspect of gradient-based learning which poses difﬁculties for optimization:
namely, ﬂatness of the loss surface due to saturation of the activation functions, leading to vanishing gradi-
ents and a slow-down of the training process. This problem is ampliﬁed in deeper architectures, since it is
likely that the backpropagated message to lower layers in the architecture would vanish due to a saturated
activation somewhere along the way. This is a major problem when using sigmoids as a gating mechanisms
in Recurrent Neural Networks such as LSTMS and GRUs [12, 4].
While non-local search-based optimization for large scale problems seems to be beyond reach, variants
on the gradient update, whether by adding momentum, higher order methods, or normalized gradients, are
quite successful, leading to consideration of update schemes deviating from “vanilla” gradient updates.
In this section, we consider a family of activation functions which amplify the “vanishing gradient
due to saturated activation” problem; they are piecewise ﬂat. Using such activations in a neural network
architecture will result in a gradient equal to 0, which will be completely useless. We consider different
ways to implement, approximate or learn such activations, such that the error will effectively propagate
through them. Using a different variant of a local search-based update, based on [20, 19] , we arrive at
13
(a) Section 4.1.1’s experiment - linear architecture.
(b) Section 4.1.2’s experiment - convolutional architecture.
(c) Section 4.1.3’s experiment - convolutional architecture with conditioning.
(d) 4.1.4’s experiment - vanilla auto encoder.
Figure 5: Examples for decoded outputs of Section 4’s experiments, learning to encode PWL curves. In
blue are the original curves. In red are the decoded curves. The plot shows the outputs for two curves, after
500, 10000, and 50000 iterations, from left to right.
14
an efﬁcient solution. Convergence guarantees exist for a one-layer architecture. We leave further study of
deeper networks to future work.
5.1 Experimental Setup
Consider the following optimization setup. The sample space X⊂ Rd is symmetrically distributed. The
target functiony : Rd→ R is of the formy(x) = u(v∗⊤x +b∗), where v∗∈ Rd,b∗∈ R, andu : R→ R
is a monotonically non-decreasing function. The objective of the optimization problem is given by:
min
w
E
x
[ℓ (u(Nw(x)),y (x))]
whereNw is some neural network parametrized byw, andℓ is some loss function (for example, the squared
or absolute difference).
For the experiments, we useu of the form:
u(r) =z0 +
∑
i∈[55]
1[r>zi]· (zi−zi−1),
wherez0 < z1 < ... < z55 are known. In words, given r, the function rounds down to the nearest zi. We
also experiment with normally distributed X. Our theoretical analysis is not restricted to u of this speciﬁc
form, nor to normalX. All ﬁgures are found in Figure 6.
Of course, applying gradient-based methods to solve this problem directly, is doomed to fail as the
derivative ofu is identically 0. Is there anything which can be done instead?
5.2 Non-Flat Approximation Experiment
We start off by trying to approximateu using a non ﬂat function ˜u deﬁned by
˜u(r) =z0 +
∑
i∈[55]
(zi−zi−1)·σ(c· (r−zi)),
wherec is some constant, and σ is the sigmoid function σ(z) = (1 + exp(−z))−1. Intuitively, we approx-
imate the “steps” in u using a sum of sigmoids, each of amplitude corresponding to the step’s height, and
centered at the step’s position. This is similar to the motivation for using sigmoids as activation functions
and as gates in LSTM cells — a non-ﬂat approximation of the step function. Below is an example for u, and
its approximation ˜u.
u
˜u
The objective is the expected squared loss, propagated through ˜u, namely
min
v,b
E
x
[(
˜u(v⊤x +b)−y(x)
)2]
.
Although the objective is not completely ﬂat, and is continuous, it suffers from the ﬂatness and non continu-
ity deﬁciencies of the originalu, and training using this objective is much slower, and sometimes completely
failing. In particular, sensitivity to the initialization of bias term is observed, where the wrong initialization
can cause the starting point to be in a very wide ﬂat region ofu, and hence a very ﬂat region of ˜u.
15
5.3 End-to-End Experiment
Next, we attempt to solve the problem using improper learning, with the objective now being:
min
w
E
x
[
(Nw(x)−y(x))2
]
where Nw is a network parametrized by its weight vector w. We use a simple architecture of four fully
connected layers, the ﬁrst three with ReLU activations and 100 output channels, and the last, with only one
output channel and no activation function.
As covered in Section 4, difﬁculty arises when regressing to non smooth functions. In this case, with
u not even being continuous, the inaccuracies in capturing the non continuity points are brought to the
forefront. Moreover, this solution has its extra price in terms of sample complexity, training time, and test
time, due to the use of a much larger than necessary network. An advantage is of course the minimal prior
knowledge aboutu which is required. While this approach manages to ﬁnd a reasonable solution, it is far
from being perfect.
5.4 Multi-Class Experiment
In this experiment, we approach the problem as a general multi-class classiﬁcation problem, with each value
of the image of u is treated as a separate class. We use a similar architecture to that of the end-to-end
experiment, with one less hidden layer, and with the ﬁnal layer outputting 55 outputs, each corresponding
to one of the steps deﬁned by thezis. A problem here is the inaccuracies at the boundaries between classes,
due to the lack of structure imposed over the predictor. The fact that the linear connection between x and
the input to u is not imposed through the architecture results in “blurry” boundaries. In addition, the fact
that we rely on an “improper” approach, in the sense that we ignore the ordering imposed by u, results in
higher sample complexity.
5.5 The “Forward-Only” Update Rule
Let us go back to a direct formulation of the problem, in the form of the objective function
min
w
F (w) = E
x
[
(u(w⊤x)−y(x))2
]
wherey(x) = u(v∗⊤x). The gradient update rule in this case is w(t+1) = w(t)−η∇F (w(t)), where for
our objective we have
∇F (w) = E
x
[
(u(w⊤x)−y(x))·u′(w⊤x)· x
]
Sinceu′ is zero a.e., the gradient update is meaningless. [20, 19] proposed to replace the gradient with the
following:
˜∇F (w) = E
x
[
(u(w⊤x)−y(x))· x
]
(4)
In terms of the backpropagation algorithm, this kind of update can be interpreted as replacing the backprop-
agation message for the activation functionu with an identity message. For notation simplicity, we omitted
the bias termsb,b∗, but the same Forward-only concept is applied to them too.
This method empirically achieves the best results, both in terms of ﬁnal accuracy, training time, and test
time cost. As mentioned before, the method is due to [20, 19], where it is proven to converge to anϵ-optimal
solution in O(L2/ϵ2), under the additional assumptions that the function u is L-Lipschitz, and that w is
constrained to have bounded norm. For completeness, we provide a short proof in Appendix B.8.
16
(a) Experiment 5.2, Non-ﬂat approximation (b) Experiment 5.3, end-to-end
(c) Experiment 5.4, Multi Class (d) Experiment 5.4, Multi Class. Zoomed-in
boundary between classes.
(e) Experiment 5.5, Forward only
Figure 6: Section 5’s Experiment: backpropagating through the steps function. The horizontal axis is the
value ofr = v∗⊤x +b∗. The dashed green curves show the label, u(r). The red curves show the outputs
of the learnt hypothesis. The plots are zoomed around the mean of r. In the non-ﬂat approximation plot,
the dashed magenta curve shows the non-ﬂat approximation, namely ˜u(r). Note the inaccuracies around the
boundaries between classes in the Multi Class experiment. All plots show the results after 10000 training
iterations, except for the forward only plot, showing results after 5000 iterations.
17
−1 −0.5 0 0.5 1
−1
0
1
(a) Extremely small variance in the loss sur-
face’s gradient, w.r.t. different target functions,
each with a very different optimum.
−1 −0.5 0 0.5 1
−1
0
1
(b) Low SNR of gradient estimates. The dashed
lines represent losses w.r.t. different samples,
each implying a very different estimate than the
average gradient.
−2 0 2
−2
0
2
(c) Bad conditioning - 2 dimensional example
of a loss function’s quiver. Following the gra-
dient is far from being the best direction to go.
−1 −0.5 0 0.5 1
−1
0
1
(d) Completely ﬂat activation - no information
in the gradient.
Figure 7: A graphical summary of limitations of gradient-based learning.
6 Summary
In this paper, we considered different families of problems, where standard gradient-based deep learning
approaches appear to suffer from signiﬁcant difﬁculties. Our analysis indicates that these difﬁculties are not
necessarily related to stationary point issues such as spurious local minima or a plethora of saddle points, but
rather more subtle issues: Insufﬁcient information in the gradients about the underlying target function; low
SNR; bad conditioning; or ﬂatness in the activations (see Figure 7 for a graphical illustration). We consider
it as a ﬁrst step towards a better understanding of where standard deep learning methods might fail, as well
as what approaches might overcome these failures.
Acknowledgements: This research is supported in part by the Intel Collaborative Research Institute for
Computational Intelligence (ICRI-CI), and by the European Research Council (TheoryDL project). OS was
also supported in part by an FP7 Marie Curie CIG grant and an Israel Science Foundation grant 425/13.
18
References
[1] Avrim Blum, Merrick Furst, Jeffrey Jackson, Michael Kearns, Yishay Mansour, and Steven Rudich.
Weakly learning dnf and characterizing statistical query learning using fourier analysis. InProceedings
of the twenty-sixth annual ACM symposium on Theory of computing, pages 253–262. ACM, 1994.
[2] Rich Caruana. Multitask learning. In Learning to learn, pages 95–133. Springer, 1998.
[3] Anna Choromanska, Mikael Henaff, Michael Mathieu, G ´erard Ben Arous, and Yann LeCun. The loss
surfaces of multilayer networks. In AISTATS, 2015.
[4] Junyoung Chung, Caglar Gulcehre, KyungHyun Cho, and Yoshua Bengio. Empirical evaluation of
gated recurrent neural networks on sequence modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.3555, 2014.
[5] Ronan Collobert and Jason Weston. A uniﬁed architecture for natural language processing: Deep neu-
ral networks with multitask learning. In Proceedings of the 25th international conference on Machine
learning, pages 160–167. ACM, 2008.
[6] Yann N Dauphin, Razvan Pascanu, Caglar Gulcehre, Kyunghyun Cho, Surya Ganguli, and Yoshua
Bengio. Identifying and attacking the saddle point problem in high-dimensional non-convex optimiza-
tion. In Advances in neural information processing systems, pages 2933–2941, 2014.
[7] John Duchi, Elad Hazan, and Yoram Singer. Adaptive subgradient methods for online learning and
stochastic optimization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 12(Jul):2121–2159, 2011.
[8] Vitaly Feldman, Cristobal Guzman, and Santosh Vempala. Statistical query algorithms for stochastic
convex optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.09170, 2015.
[9] Saeed Ghadimi and Guanghui Lan. Stochastic ﬁrst-and zeroth-order methods for nonconvex stochastic
programming. SIAM Journal on Optimization, 23(4):2341–2368, 2013.
[10] Xavier Glorot and Yoshua Bengio. Understanding the difﬁculty of training deep feedforward neural
networks. In Aistats, volume 9, pages 249–256, 2010.
[11] Alex Graves, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, and Geoffrey Hinton. Speech recognition with deep recur-
rent neural networks. In Acoustics, speech and signal processing (icassp), 2013 ieee international
conference on, pages 6645–6649. IEEE, 2013.
[12] Alex Graves and J ¨urgen Schmidhuber. Framewise phoneme classiﬁcation with bidirectional lstm and
other neural network architectures. Neural Networks, 18(5):602–610, 2005.
[13] C ¸ alar G¨ulc ¸ehre and Yoshua Bengio. Knowledge matters: Importance of prior information for opti-
mization. Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(8):1–32, 2016.
[14] Kaiming He, Xiangyu Zhang, Shaoqing Ren, and Jian Sun. Deep residual learning for image recogni-
tion. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2016.
[15] Geoffrey Hinton, Li Deng, Dong Yu, George E Dahl, Abdel-rahman Mohamed, Navdeep Jaitly, An-
drew Senior, Vincent Vanhoucke, Patrick Nguyen, Tara N Sainath, et al. Deep neural networks for
acoustic modeling in speech recognition: The shared views of four research groups. IEEE Signal
Processing Magazine, 29(6):82–97, 2012.
19
[16] Geoffrey E Hinton and Ruslan R Salakhutdinov. Reducing the dimensionality of data with neural
networks. science, 313(5786):504–507, 2006.
[17] Sepp Hochreiter and J ¨urgen Schmidhuber. Long short-term memory. Neural computation, 9(8):1735–
1780, 1997.
[18] Sergey Ioffe and Christian Szegedy. Batch normalization: Accelerating deep network training by
reducing internal covariate shift. arXiv preprint arXiv:1502.03167, 2015.
[19] Sham M Kakade, Varun Kanade, Ohad Shamir, and Adam Kalai. Efﬁcient learning of generalized
linear and single index models with isotonic regression. InAdvances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, pages 927–935, 2011.
[20] Adam Tauman Kalai and Ravi Sastry. The isotron algorithm: High-dimensional isotonic regression.
In COLT, 2009.
[21] Michael Kearns. Efﬁcient noise-tolerant learning from statistical queries. Journal of the ACM (JACM),
45(6):983–1006, 1998.
[22] Diederik Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1412.6980, 2014.
[23] Alex Krizhevsky, Ilya Sutskever, and Geoffrey E Hinton. Imagenet classiﬁcation with deep convo-
lutional neural networks. In Advances in neural information processing systems , pages 1097–1105,
2012.
[24] V olodymyr Mnih, Koray Kavukcuoglu, David Silver, Andrei A Rusu, Joel Veness, Marc G Bellemare,
Alex Graves, Martin Riedmiller, Andreas K Fidjeland, Georg Ostrovski, et al. Human-level control
through deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 518(7540):529–533, 2015.
[25] Florian Schroff, Dmitry Kalenichenko, and James Philbin. Facenet: A uniﬁed embedding for face
recognition and clustering. In The IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), June 2015.
[26] John Schulman, Sergey Levine, Pieter Abbeel, Michael I Jordan, and Philipp Moritz. Trust region
policy optimization. In ICML, pages 1889–1897, 2015.
[27] Shai Shalev-Shwartz, Alon Gonen, and Ohad Shamir. Large-scale convex minimization with a low-
rank constraint. arXiv preprint arXiv:1106.1622, 2011.
[28] Shai Shalev-Shwartz and Amnon Shashua. On the sample complexity of end-to-end training vs. se-
mantic abstraction training. arXiv preprint arXiv:1604.06915, 2016.
[29] Ohad Shamir. Distribution-speciﬁc hardness of learning neural networks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1609.01037, 2016.
[30] Ilya Sutskever, James Martens, George E Dahl, and Geoffrey E Hinton. On the importance of initial-
ization and momentum in deep learning. ICML (3), 28:1139–1147, 2013.
[31] Christian Szegedy, Sergey Ioffe, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Alex Alemi. Inception-v4, inception-resnet
and the impact of residual connections on learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:1602.07261, 2016.
20
[32] Christian Szegedy, Wei Liu, Yangqing Jia, Pierre Sermanet, Scott Reed, Dragomir Anguelov, Dumitru
Erhan, Vincent Vanhoucke, and Andrew Rabinovich. Going deeper with convolutions. InProceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1–9, 2015.
[33] Yaniv Taigman, Ming Yang, Marc’Aurelio Ranzato, and Lior Wolf. Deepface: Closing the gap to
human-level performance in face veriﬁcation. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1701–1708, 2014.
[34] A ¨aron van den Oord, Sander Dieleman, Heiga Zen, Karen Simonyan, Oriol Vinyals, Alex Graves, Nal
Kalchbrenner, Andrew Senior, and Koray Kavukcuoglu. Wavenet: A generative model for raw audio.
CoRR abs/1609.03499, 2016.
A Reduced Noise through Decomposition - Experiment
A.1 Experiment
For this experiment, consider the problem of training a predictor, which given a “positive media reference”
x to a certain stock option, will distribute our assets between the k = 500 stocks in the S&P500 index in
some manner. One can, again, come up with two rather different strategies for solving the problem.
• An end-to-end approach: train a deep network Nw that given x outputs a distribution over the k
stocks. The objective for training is maximizing the gain obtained by allocating our money according
to this distribution.
• A decomposition approach: train a deep network Nw that given x outputs a single stock, y∈ [k],
whose future gains are the most positively correlated to x. Of course, we may need to gather extra
labeling for trainingNw based on this criterion.
We make the (non-realistic) assumption that every instance of media reference is strongly and positively
correlated to a single stock y∈ [k], and it has no correlation with future performance of other stocks. This
obviously makes our problem rather toyish; the stock exchange and media worlds have highly complicated
correlations. However, it indeed arises from, and is motivated by, practical problems.
To examine the problem in a simple and theoretically clean manner, we design a synthetic experiment
deﬁned by the following optimization problem: Let X×Z⊂ Rd×{± 1}k be the sample space, and let
y : X→ [k] be some labelling function. We would like to learn a mapping Nw : X→ Sk−1, with the
objective being:
min
w
L(w) := E
x,z∼X×Z
[
−z⊤Nw(x)
]
.
To connect this to our story, Nw(x) is our asset distribution, z indicates the future performance of the
stocks, and thus, we are seeking minimization of our expected future negative gains, or in other words,
maximization of expected proﬁt. We further assume that given x, the coordinate zy(x) equals 1, and the rest
of the coordinates are sampled i.i.d from the uniform distribution over{±1}.
Whereas in Section 3.1’s experiment, the difference between the end-to-end and decomposition ap-
proaches could be summarized by a different loss function choice, in this experiment, the difference boils
down to the different gradient estimators we would use, where we are again taking as a given fact that exact
gradient computations are expensive for large-scale problems, implying the method of choice to be SGD.
For the purpose of the experimental discussion, let us write the two estimators explicitly as two unconnected
update rules. We will later analyze their (equal) expectation.
21
0 2,500−1
0
k = 10
0 2,500−1
0
k = 1000
0 2,500−1
0
k = 2000
Figure 8: Decomposition vs. end-to-end Experiment: Loss as a function of the number of training iterations,
for input dimensiond = 1000 and for variousk values. The red and blue curves correspond to the losses of
the end-to-end and decomposition estimators, respectively.
For an end-to-end approach, we sample a pair (x, z), and use∇w(−z⊤Nw(x)) as a gradient estimate.
It is clear that this is an unbiased estimator of the gradient.
For a decomposition approach, we sample a pair (x, z), completely ignore z, and instead, pay the extra
costs and gather the required labelling to get y(x). We will then use ∇w(−e⊤
y(x)Nw(x)) as a gradient
estimate. It will be shown later that this too is an unbiased estimator of the gradient.
Figure 8 clearly shows that optimizing using the end-to-end estimator is inferior to working with the
decomposition one, in terms of training time and ﬁnal accuracy, to the extent that for largek, the end-to-end
estimator cannot close the gap in performance in reasonable time.
A.2 Analysis
We examine the experiment from a SNR perspective. First, let us show that indeed, both estimators are
unbiased estimators of the true gradient. As stated above, it is clear, by deﬁnition of L, that the end-to-
end estimator is an unbiased estimator of∇wL(w). To observe this is also the case for the decomposition
estimator, we write:
∇wL(w) =∇w E
x,z
[−z⊤Nw(x)]
= E
x
[ E
z|x
[∇w(−z⊤Nw(x))]]
(1)
= E
x
[ E
z|x
[−z⊤∇w(Nw(x))]]
(2)
= E
x
[−e⊤
y(x)∇w(Nw(x))]
where (1) follows from the chain rule, and (2) from the assumption on the distribution of z given x. It is
now easy to see that the decomposition estimator is indeed a (different) unbiased estimator of the gradient,
hence the “signal” is the same.
Intuition says that when a choice between two unbiased estimators is presented, we should choose the
one with the lower variance. In our context, [9] showed that when running SGD (even on non-convex
objectives), arriving at a point where∥∇wL(w)∥2≤ϵ requires order of ¯ν2/ϵ2 iterations, where
¯ν2 = max
t
E
x,q
∥∇t
w(x,q )∥2−∥∇ wL(w(t))∥2,
wt is the weight vector at time t,q is sampled along with x (where it can be replaced by z ory(x), in our
22
experiment), and∇t
w is the unbiased estimator for the gradient. This serves as a motivation for analyzing
the problem through this lens.
Motivated by [9]’s result, and by our results regarding Section 3.1, we examine the quantityEx,q∥∇t
w(x,q )∥2,
or “noise”, explicitly. For the end-to-end estimator, this quantity equals
E
x,z
∥− z⊤∇wNw(x)∥2 = E
x,z
∥−
k∑
i=1
zi∇wNw(x)i∥2
Denoting byGi :=∇wNw(x)i, we get:
= E
x
E
z|x
∥−
k∑
i=1
ziGi∥2 = E
x
k∑
i=1
∥Gi∥2 (5)
where the last equality follows from expanding the squared sum, and taking expectation overz, while noting
that mixed terms cancel out (from independence of z’s coordinates), and thatz2
i = 1 for alli.
As for the decomposition estimator, it is easy to see that
E
x
∥− e⊤
y(x)∇wNw(x)∥2 = E
x
∥Gy(x)∥2. (6)
Observe that in 5 we are summing up, per x,k summands, compared to the single element in 6. When
randomly initializing a network it is likely that the values of∥Gi∥2 are similar, hence we obtain that at the
beginning of training, the variance of the end-to-end estimator is roughly k times larger than that of the
decomposition estimator.
B Proofs
B.1 Proof of Theorem 1
Proof Given two square-integrable functionsf,g on an Euclidean space Rn, let⟨f,g⟩L2 = Ex[f(x)g(x)]
and∥f∥L2 =
√
Ex[f 2(x)] denote inner product and norm in the L2 space of square-integrable functions
(with respect to the relevant distribution). Also, deﬁne the vector-valued function
g(x) = ∂
∂wpw(x),
and let g(x) = (g1(x),g 2(x),...,g n(x)) for real-valued functions g1,...,g n. Finally, let Eh denote an
expectation with respect toh chosen uniformly at random fromH. Let|H| =d.
We begin by proving the result for the squared loss. To prove the bound, it is enough to show that
Eh∥∇Fh(w)−a∥2≤ G2
|H| for any vectora independent ofh. In particular, let us choosea = Ex [pw(x)g(x)].
23
We thus bound the following:
E
h
∥∇Fh(w)− E
x
[pw(x)g(x)]∥2 = E
h
∥ E
x
[(pw(x)−h(x)) g(x)]− E
x
[pw(x)g(x)]∥2
= E
h
∥ E
x
[h(x)g(x)]∥2 = E
h
n∑
j=1
(
E
x
[h(x)gj(x)]
)2
= E
h
n∑
j=1
⟨h,gj⟩2
L2 =
n∑
j=1
(
1
|H|
d∑
i=1
⟨hi,gj⟩2
L2
)
(∗)
≤
n∑
j=1
( 1
|H|∥gj∥2
L2
)
= 1
|H|
n∑
j=1
E
x
[g2
j (x)]
= 1
|H| E
x
[
∥g(x)∥2]
≤ G(w)2
|H| ,
where (∗) follows from the functions in H being mutually orthogonal, and satisfying ∥h∥L2 ≤ 1 for all
h∈H .
To handle a classiﬁcation loss, note that by its deﬁnition and the fact thath(x)∈{− 1, +1},
∇Fh(w) = E
x
[
r′(h(x)pw(x))· ∂
∂wpw(x)
]
= E
x
[(r′(pw(x)) +r′(−pw(x))
2 +h(x)· r′(pw(x))−r′(−pw(x))
2
)
· ∂
∂wpw(x)
]
= E
x
[r′(pw(x)) +r′(−pw(x))
2 · ∂
∂wpw(x)
]
+ E
x
[
h(x)·
(r′(pw(x))−r′(−pw(x))
2
)
· ∂
∂wpw(x)
]
.
Letting g(x) =
(
r′(pw(x))−r′(−pw(x))
2
)
· ∂
∂wpw(x) (which satisﬁes Ex[∥g(x)∥2]≤G2 sincer is 1-Lipschitz)
and a = Ex
[
r′(pw(x))+r′(−pw(x))
2 · ∂
∂wpw(x)
]
(which does not depend onh), we get that
E
h
∥∇Fh(w)− a∥2 = E
h
∥ E
x
[h(x)g(x)]∥2.
Proceeding now exactly in the same manner as the squared loss case, the result follows.
B.2 Proof of Theorem 3
Proof We ﬁrst state and prove two auxiliary lemmas.
Lemma 3 Leth1,...,h n be real-valued functions on some Euclidean space, which belong to some weighted
L2 space. Suppose that∥hi∥L2 = 1 and maxi̸=j|⟨hi,hj⟩L2|≤ c. Then for any function g on the same do-
main,
1
n
n∑
i=1
⟨hi,g⟩2
L2 ≤ ∥g∥2
L2
( 1
n +c
)
.
24
Proof For simplicity, suppose ﬁrst that the functions are deﬁned over some ﬁnite domain equipped with
a uniform distribution, so that h1,...,h n and g can be thought of as ﬁnite-dimensional vectors, and the
L2 inner product and norm reduce to the standard inner product and norm in Euclidean space. Let H =
(h1,...,h n) denote the matrix whosei-th column ishi. Then
n∑
i=1
⟨hi,g⟩2 =g⊤
( n∑
i=1
hih⊤
i
)
g = g⊤HH⊤g≤∥g∥2∥HH⊤∥ = ∥g∥2∥H⊤H∥,
where∥·∥ for a matrix denotes the spectral norm. SinceH⊤H is simply then×n matrix with entry⟨hi,hj⟩
in location i,j , we can write it as I +M, where I is the n×n identity matrix, and M is a matrix with 0
along the main diagonal, and entries of absolute value at most c otherwise. Therefore, letting∥·∥ F denote
the Frobenius norm, we have that the above is at most
∥g∥2 (∥I∥ +∥M∥) ≤ ∥g∥2 (1 +∥M∥F ) = ∥g∥2 (1 +cn),
from which the result follows.
Finally, it is easily veriﬁed that the same proof holds even when h1,...,h n,g are functions over some
Euclidean space, belonging to some weightedL2 space. In that case, H is a bounded linear operator, and it
holds that∥H∗H∥ =∥H∥2 =∥H∗∥2 =∥HH∗∥ whereH∗ is the Hermitian adjoint of H and the norm is
the operator norm. The rest of the proof is essentially identical.
Lemma 4 If w, v are two unit vectors in Rd, and x is a standard Gaussian random vector, then
⏐⏐⏐E
x
[
sign(w⊤x)sign(v⊤x)
]⏐⏐⏐≤|⟨ w, v⟩|
Proof Note that w⊤x, v⊤x are jointly zero-mean Gaussian, each with variance 1 and with covariance
E[w⊤xx⊤v] = w⊤v. Therefore,
E
x
[
sign(w⊤x)sign(v⊤x)
]
= Pr(w⊤x≥ 0, v⊤x≥ 0) + Pr(w⊤x≤ 0, v⊤x≤ 0)
− Pr(w⊤x≥ 0, v⊤x≤ 0)− Pr(w⊤x≤ 0, v⊤x≥ 0)
= 2 Pr(w⊤x≥ 0, v⊤x≥ 0)− 2 Pr(w⊤x≥ 0, v⊤x≤ 0),
which by a standard fact on the quadrant probability of bivariate normal distributions, equals
2
(1
4 + sin−1(w⊤v)
2π
)
− 2
(cos−1(w⊤v)
2π
)
= 1
2 + 1
π
(
sin−1(w⊤v)− cos−1(w⊤v)
)
= 1
2 + 1
π
(
2 sin−1(w⊤v)− π
2
)
= 2 sin−1(w⊤v)
π .
The absolute value of the above can be easily veriﬁed to be upper bounded by|w⊤v|, from which the result
follows.
With these lemmas at hand, we turn to prove our theorem. By a standard measure concentration
argument, we can ﬁnd dk unit vectors u1, u2,..., udk in Rd such that their inner product is at most
25
O(
√
k log(d)/d) (where theO(·) notation is w.r.t.d). This induces dk functionshu1,h u2,...,h udk where
hu(x1,..., xk) = ∏k
l=1 sign(u⊤xl). Their L2 norm (w.r.t. the distribution over xk
1 = ( x1,..., xk)) is
1, as they take values in {−1, +1}. Moreover, since x1,..., xk are i.i.d. standard Gaussian, we have by
Lemma 4 that for anyi̸=j,
⟨hui,h uj⟩L2 =
⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐E
[ k∏
l=1
sign(u⊤
i xl)
k∏
l=1
sign(u⊤
j xl)
]⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐
=
⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐
k∏
l=1
E
[
sign(u⊤
i xl)sign(u⊤
j xl)
]⏐⏐⏐⏐⏐
=
⏐⏐⏐E
[
sign(u⊤
i xl)sign(u⊤
j xl)
]⏐⏐⏐
k
≤| u⊤
i uj|k ≤ O
(√
k log(d)
d
)k
.
Using this and Lemma 3, we have that for any functiong,
1
dk
dk
∑
i=1
⟨hui,g⟩2
L2 ≤ ∥g∥2
L2·

 1
dk +O
(√
k log(d)
d
)k
 ≤ ∥g∥2
L2·O
(√
k log(d)
d
)k
.
Moreover, since this bound is derived based only on an inner product condition between u1,..., udk, the
same result would hold for Uu1,...,U udk whereU is an arbitrary orthogonal matrix, and in particular if
we pick it uniformly at random:
E
U

 1
dk
dk
∑
i=1
⟨hU ui,g⟩2
L2

 ≤ ∥g∥2
L2·
(
1
dk +O
(√
k log(d)
d
))
.
Now, note that for any ﬁxedi,Uui is uniformly distributed on the unit sphere, so the left hand side simply
equals Eu
[
⟨hu,g⟩2
L2
]
, and we get
E
u
[
⟨hu,g⟩2
L2
]
≤ ∥g∥2·O
(√
k log(d)
d
)k
. (7)
With this key inequality at hand, the proof is now very similar to the one of Theorem 1. Given the
predictorpw(xk
1), where w∈ Rn, deﬁne the vector-valued function g(xk
1) = ∂
∂wpw(xk
1), and let g(xk
1) =
(g1(xk
1),g 2(xk
1),...,g n(xk
1)) for real-valued functions g1,...,g n. To prove the bound, it is enough to
upper bound Eu∥∇Fu(w)− a∥2 for any vector a independent of u. In particular, let us choose a =
26
Exk
1
[
pw(xk
1)g(xk
1)
]
. We thus bound the following:
E
u
∥∇Fu(w)− E
xk
1
[
pw(xk
1)g(xk
1)
]
∥2 = E
u
∥ E
xk
1
[(
pw(xk
1)−hu(xk
1)
)
g(xk
1)
]
− E
xk
1
[
pw(xk
1)g(xk
1)
]
∥2
= E
u
∥ E
xk
1
[
hu(xk
1)g(xk
1)
]
∥2 = E
u
n∑
j=1
(
E
xk
1
[
hu(xk
1)gj(xk
1)
])2
= E
u
n∑
j=1
⟨hu,gj⟩2
L2 =
n∑
j=1
E
u
⟨hu,gj⟩2
L2
(∗)
≤
n∑
j=1
∥gj∥2·O
(√
k log(d)
d
)k
=
n∑
j=1
E
xk
1
[g2
j (xk
1)]·O
(√
k log(d)
d
)k
= E
xk
1
∥g(xk
1)∥2·O
(√
k log(d)
d
)k
≤ G(w)2·O
(√
k log(d)
d
)k
,
where (∗) follows from (7). By deﬁnition of Var(H,F, w), the result follows. Generalization for the classi-
ﬁcation loss is obtained in the exact same way to the one used in the proof of Theorem 1.
B.3 Proof of lemma 1
Proof
(UW )i,j =
∑
t
Ui,tWt,j =Wi,j− 2Wi−1,j +Wi−2,j
Ifi≥j + 1 then Wi,j +Wi−2,j
2 =Wi−1,j and therefore the above is clearly zero. If i<j then all the values
ofW are zeros. Finally, ifi =j we obtain 1. This concludes our proof.
B.4 Proof of lemma 2
Proof Given a sample f, and that our current weight matrix is ˆU, let p =W−1f. The loss function on f is
given by
1
2∥ ˆUf− p∥2
The gradient w.r.t. ˆU is
∇ = ( ˆUf− p)f⊤ = ˆUﬀ⊤− pf⊤
We obtain that the update rule is
ˆUt+1 = ˆUt−η
(
ˆUtﬀ⊤− pf⊤
)
= ˆUt(I−ηﬀ⊤) +ηpf⊤
Taking expectation with respect to the random choice of the pair, using again f = Wp, and assuming
E pp⊤ =λI, we obtain that the stochastic gradient update rule satisﬁes
E ˆUt+1 = ˆUt(I−ηλWW⊤) +ηλW⊤
27
Continuing recursively, we obtain
E ˆUt+1 = E ˆUt(I−ηλWW⊤) +ηλW⊤
=
[
E ˆUt−1(I−ηλWW⊤) +ηλW⊤
]
(I−ηλWW⊤) +ηλW⊤
= E ˆUt−1(I−ηλWW⊤)2 +ηλW⊤(I−ηλWW⊤) +ηλW⊤
= ˆU0(I−ηλWW⊤)t +ηλW⊤
t∑
i=0
(I−ηλWW⊤)i
We assume that ˆU0 = 0, and thus
E ˆUt+1 =ηλW⊤
t∑
i=0
(I−ηλWW⊤)i
B.5 Proof of Theorem 4
Proof Fix somei, we have that
(I−ηλWW ⊤)i = (QIQ⊤−ηλQSV ⊤VSQ⊤)i =Q(I−ηλSS )iQ⊤ =QΛiQ⊤
where Λi is diagonal with Λi
j,j = (1−ηλS 2
j )i. Therefore, by the properties of geometric series, E ˆUt+1
converges if and only ifηλS 2
1,1< 1. When this condition holds we have that
ˆU∞ =ηλW ⊤
∞∑
i=0
(I−ηλWW ⊤)i
=ηλW ⊤(ηλWW ⊤)−1 =W⊤(WW⊤)−1
=VSQ⊤(QSV⊤VSQ⊤)−1 =VSQ⊤QS−2Q⊤ =VS−1Q⊤ =U .
Therefore,
E ˆUt+1−U =ηλW⊤
∞∑
i=t+1
(I−ηλWW ⊤)i
=ηλVSQ ⊤
∞∑
i=t+1
QΛiQ⊤
=V
[ ∞∑
i=t+1
(ηλS )Λi
]
Q⊤.
The matrix in the parentheses is diagonal, where thej’th diagonal element is
ηλSj,j·
(1−ηλS 2
j,j)t+1
ηλS 2
j,j
=S−1
j,j (1−ηλS 2
j,j)t+1
28
It follows that
∥ E ˆUt+1−U∥ = max
j
S−1
j,j (1−ηλS 2
j,j)t+1
Using the inequality (1−a)t+1≥ 1− (t + 1)a, that holds for everya∈ (−1, 1), we obtain that
∥ E ˆUt+1−U∥≥ S−1
n,n(1− (t + 1)ηλS 2
n,n)≥S−1
n,n(1− (t + 1)S2
n,n
S2
1,1
).
It follows that whenever,
t + 1≤ S2
1,1
2S2n,n
,
we have that∥ E ˆUt+1−U∥≥ 0.5S−1
n,n. Finally, observe that
S2
n,n = min
x:∥x∥=1
x⊤WW⊤x≤e⊤
1WW⊤e1 = 1,
henceS−1
n,n≥ 1.
We now prove the second part of the theorem, regarding the condition number of W⊤W , namely,
S2
1,1
2S2n,n
≥ Ω(n3.5). We note that the condition number of W⊤W can be calculated through its inverse
matrix’s, namely,U⊤U’s condition number, as those are equal.
It is easy to verify that Uen = en. Therefore, the maximal eigenvalue of U⊤U is at least 1. To
construct an upper bound on the minimal eigenvalue of U⊤U, consider v∈ Rn s.t. for i≤√n we have
vi =− 1
2(i/n)2 and fori> √n we havevi = 1
2n− i/n√n. We have that|vi| =O(1/n) fori< √n + 2 andv
is linear fori≥√n. This implies that (Uv )i = 0 fori≥√n + 2. We also have (Uv )1 =v1 =−0.5/n2,
(Uv )2 =−2v1 +v2≈− 1/n2, and fori∈{ 3,..., √n} we have
(Uv )i =vi−2− 2vi−1 +vi =−3/n2
Finally, fori =√n + 1 we have
(Uv )i =vi−2− 2vi−1 +vi =vi−vi−1− (vi−1−vi−2)
= 1
n√n− 1
2n2
(
(i− 1)2− (i− 2)2)
= 1
n√n− 1
2n2 (2i− 3) = 1
2n2 .
This yields
∥Uv∥2≈ Θ(√n/n4) = Θ(n−3.5)
In addition,
∥v∥2≥
n∑
i=n/2
v2
i≥ n
2 v2
n/2 = n
2
( 1
2n− 1
2√n
)2
= Ω(1).
Therefore,
∥Uv∥2
∥v∥2 =O(n−3.5),
which implies that the minimal eigenvalue ofU⊤U is at mostO(n−3.5). All in all, we have shown that the
condition number ofU⊤U is Ω(n−3.5), implying the same overW⊤W .
29
B.6 Gradient Descent for Linear Regression
The loss function is
E
x,y
1
2(x⊤w−y)2
The gradient atw is
∇ = E
x,y
x(x⊤w−y) =
(
E
x
xx⊤
)
w− E
x,y
xy :=Cw−z
For the optimal solution we haveCw∗−z = 0, hencez =Cw∗. The update is therefore
wt+1 =wt−η(Cwt−z) = (I−ηC)wt +ηz =... =
t∑
i=0
(I−ηC)iηz =
t∑
i=0
(I−ηC)iηCw∗
LetC =VDV ⊤ be the eigenvalue decomposition ofC. Observe that
wt+1 =V
t∑
i=0
η(I−ηD)iDV⊤w∗
Hence
∥w∗−wt+1∥ =∥(VV ⊤−V
t∑
i=0
η(I−ηD)iDV⊤)w∗∥
=∥(I−
t∑
i=0
η(I−ηD)iD)V⊤w∗∥
=∥(I−ηD)t+1V⊤w∗∥,
where the last equality is because for everyj we have
(I−
t∑
i=0
η(I−ηD)iD)j,j = 1−
t∑
i=0
η(1−ηDj,j)iDj,j = (1−ηDj,j)t+1.
Denotev∗ =V⊤w∗. We therefore obtain that
∥w∗−wt+1∥2 =
n∑
j=1
(
(1−ηDj,j)t+1v∗
j
)2
To obtain an upper bound, chooseη = 1/D1,1 andt + 1≥ D1,1
Dn,n log(∥w∗∥/ϵ), and then, using 1−a≤e−a,
we get that
∥w∗−wt+1∥2≤
n∑
j=1
(
exp(−ηDj,j(t + 1))v∗
j
)2≤ ϵ2
∥w∗∥2
n∑
j=1
(
v∗
j
)2 =ϵ2.
To obtain a lower bound, observe that ifv∗
1 is non-negligible thenη must be at most 1/D1,1 (otherwise
the process will diverge). If in additionv∗
n is a constant (for simplicity, sayv∗
n = 1), then
∥w∗−wt+1∥≥ (1−ηDn,n)t+1≥ (1−Dn,n/D1,1)t+1≥ 1− (t + 1)Dn,n/D1,1,
where we used (1−a)t+1≥ 1− (t + 1)a fora∈ [−1, 1]. It follows that ift + 1< 0.5Dn,n/D1,1 then we
have that∥w∗−wt+1∥≥ 0.5.
30
B.7 The Covariance Matrix of Section 4.1.2
Denote byC∈ R3,3 the covariance matrix, and let λi(C) denote thei’th eigenvalue ofC (in a decreasing
order). The condition number of C is λ1(C)/λ3(C). Below we derive lower and upper bounds on the
condition number under some assumptions.
Lower bound We assume thatEf,tf 2
t = Ω(n2) (this would be the case in many typical cases, for example
when the allowed slopes are in {±1}), that k (the number of pieces of the curve) is constant, and that the
changes of slope are in [−1, 1].
Now, takev = [1, 1, 1]⊤, then
v⊤Cv = E
f,t
(ft−1 +ft +ft+1)2 = Ω(n2)
This yieldsλ1(C)≥ Ω(n2). Next, takev = [1,−2, 1]⊤ we obtain
v⊤Cv = E
f,t
(ft−1−ft +ft+1)2 =O(k/n)
This yieldsλ3(C)≤O(k/n). All in all, we obtain that the condition number ofC is Ω(n3).
Upper bound We consider distribution over f s.t. for every f, at exactlyk indices f changes slope from
1 to−1 or from−1 to 1 (with equal probability over the indices), and at the rest of the indices we have that
f is linear with a slope of 1 or−1. Denote p =k/n. Take any unit vectorv, and denote ¯v =v1 +v2 +v3.
Then
v⊤Cv = E
f,t
(v1ft−1 +v2ft +v3ft+1)2
= E
f
[
0.5(1−p)
(
(¯vft +v3−v1)2 + (¯vft +v1−v3)2)
+ 0.5p
(
(¯vft +v3 +v1)2 + (¯vft−v3−v1)2)]
= ¯v2 E
f
f 2
t + (1−p)(v1−v3)2 +p(v1 +v3)2.
Since Ef,tf 2
t = Θ(n2), it is clear that v⊤Cv = O(n2). We next establish a lower bound of Ω(1/n).
Observe that if ¯v2≥ Ω(1/n3), we are done. If this is not the case, then−v2≈v1 +v3. If|v1 +v3|> 0.1,
we are done. Otherwise, 0.9≤ 1−v2
2 = v2
1 +v2
3, so we must have that v1 andv3 has opposite signs, and
one of them is large, hence (v1−v3)2 is larger than a constant. This concludes our proof.
B.8 Proof of Update Rule 4 Convergence in the Lipschitz Case
Proof LetB be an upper bound over∥w(t)∥ for all time step t, and over∥v∗∥. Moreover, assume|u|≤ c
for some constantc. We denote the update rule by w(t) = w(t−1) +η ˜∇, and bound from below:
∥w(t)− v∗∥2−∥ w(t+1)− v∗∥2 = 2⟨w(t)− v∗,η ˜∇⟩− η2∥ ˜∇∥2
= 2η E
[
(u((w(t))⊤x)−u((v∗)⊤x))(w(t)− v∗)x
]
−η2∥ ˜∇∥2
(1)
≥ 2η
L E
[
(u((w(t))⊤x)−u((v∗)⊤x))2
]
−η2∥ ˜∇∥2
(2)
≥ 2η
L E
[
(u((w(t))⊤x)−u((v∗)⊤x))2
]
−η2B2c2
31
where (1) follows fromL-Lipschitzness and monotonicity of u, (2) follows from bounding∥w∥,∥x∥ and
u. Let the expected error of the regressor parametrized by wt be denotedet. We separate into cases:
• If∥wt− v∗∥2−∥ wt+1− v∗∥2≥η2B2c2, we can rewrite∥wt− v∗∥2−η2B2c2≥∥ wt+1− v∗∥2,
and note that since∥wt+1− v∗∥2≥ 0, and∥w0− v∗∥2≤B2, there can be at most B2
η2B2c2 = 1
η2c2
iterations where this condition will hold.
• Otherwise, we get thatet≤ηB 2c2L.
Therefore, for a givenϵ, by takingT = c4B4L2
ϵ2 , and settingη =
√
1
Tc 2 , we obtain that afterT iterations, the
ﬁrst case is not holding anymore, and the second case implieseT≤ϵ.
C Technical Lemmas
Lemma 5 Any parity function overd variables is realizable by a network with one fully connected layer of
width ˜d> 3d
2 with ReLU activations, and a fully connected output layer with linear activation and a single
unit.
Proof Let the weights entering each of the ﬁrst 3d
2 hidden units be set to v∗, and the rest to 0. Further
assume that for i∈ [d/2], the biases of the ﬁrst 3i +{1, 2, 3} units are set to−(2i− 1
2),−2i,−(2i + 1
2)
respectively, and that their weights in the output layer are1,−2, and 1. It is not hard to see that the weighted
sum of those triads of neurons is 1
2 if⟨x, v∗⟩ = 2i, and 0 otherwise. Observe that there’s such a triad deﬁned
for each even number in the range[d]. Therefore, the output of this net is 0 ify =−1, and 1
2 otherwise. It is
easy to see that scaling of the output layer’s weights by 4, and introduction of a−1 bias value to it, results
in a perfect predictor.
D Command Lines for Experiments
Our experiments are implemented in a simple manner in python. We use the tensorﬂow package for opti-
mization. The following command lines can be used for viewing all optional arguments:
To run experiment 2.1, use:
python ./parity.py --help
To run experiment 3.1, use:
python ./tuple_rect.py --help
For SNR estimations, use:
python ./tuple_rect_SNR.py --help
To run experiment A, use:
python ./dec_vs_e2e_stocks.py --help
32
For Section 4’s experiments, given below are the command lines used to generate the plots. Additional
arguments can be viewed by running:
python PWL_fail1.py --help
To run experiment 4.1.1, use:
python PWL_fail1.py --FtoK
To run experiment 4.1.2, use:
python PWL_fail1.py --FtoKConv
To run experiment 4.1.3, use:
python PWL_fail1.py --FtoKConvCond --batch_size 10
--number_of_iterations 500 --learning_rate 0.99
To run experiment 4.1.4, use:
python PWL_fail1.py --FAutoEncoder
To run Section 5’s experiments, run:
python step_learn.py --help
33